Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 6,250,728 articles in English The arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Sunda colugo, a living relative of Dermotherium Dermotherium is a genus of fossil mammals closely related to the living colugos, a small group of gliding mammals from Southeast Asia. The two species are known from Thailand; D. major from the late Eocene, based on a fragment of the lower jaw, and D. chimaera from the late Oligocene from three jaw fragments and two molars. Another upper molar from the early Oligocene of Pakistan may be from a putative D. chimaera. The animals probably lived in forested environments, like living colugos, but whether they could glide is unknown. The fossil teeth differ from those of living colugo species (example pictured), and they lack their comblike dental features involving the lower incisors, canines, and third premolars. The fossil species differ from each other in their tooth structure. The front part of the lower chewing teeth, the trigonid, is broader in D. chimaera than in D. major. (Full article...) Recently featured: Silesian Wars M113 armoured personnel carriers in Australian service Saturn (magazine) Archive By email More featured articles Did you know ... Rice's whale washed up at Everglades National Park ... that the newly described Rice's whale (example pictured) is one of the most endangered cetaceans, with fewer than 50 adult individuals believed to remain? ... that British Columbia's oldest practicing lawyer, Canadian Constance Isherwood, who died at 101, closed her last case hours before her death? ... that the Babakale Castle supplied water to the Ottoman Navy before the fleet set sail on campaigns? ... that Dorothee Manski, a soprano of the Berlin Court Opera, gave 335 performances at the Metropolitan Opera after being invited to appear there as the Witch in Humperdinck's Hänsel und Gretel in 1927? ... that Willa Cather's final story, The Best Years, contains references to her previously published novels? ... that ballerina Merrill Ashley is one of the last dancers to have worked with choreographer George Balanchine? ... that due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK the entire 2021 Netball Superleague season is being hosted at just two venues? ... that a 9-metre tall (30 ft) Malt Shovel in Burton upon Trent might actually be a scoop? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala (pictured) becomes the first woman and first African Director-General of the World Trade Organization. Former President of Argentina Carlos Menem dies at the age of 90. Former President of the United States Donald Trump is acquitted by the Senate in his second impeachment trial. Mario Draghi becomes Prime Minister of Italy, leading a national unity government after the resignation of Giuseppe Conte. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Myanmar protests Recent deaths: James Ridgeway Rupert Neve S. Prestley Blake J. Hillis Miller Milford Graves Lynn Stalmaster Nominate an article On this day February 16: Shrove Tuesday / Mardi Gras (Western Christianity, 2021); Day of the Shining Star in North Korea; Elizabeth Peratrovich Day in Alaska Act of Independence of Lithuania 1249 – Louis IX of France dispatched André de Longjumeau as his ambassador to the Mongol Empire. 1918 – The Council of Lithuania signed the Act of Independence (pictured), proclaiming the restoration of an independent Lithuania. 1936 – The Popular Front, a coalition of left-wing parties, came to power in the Spanish general election, precipitating the Spanish Civil War five months later. 1961 – The DuSable Museum, the first museum dedicated to the study and conservation of African American history, culture, and art, was chartered. 1996 – Eleven people died in a train collision in Silver Spring, Maryland, leading to the creation of comprehensive U.S. federal rules for the design of passenger cars. Mary the Younger (d. 902) The Weeknd (b. 1990) Mary Amdur (d. 1998) More anniversaries: February 15 February 16 February 17 Archive By email List of days of the year Today's featured picture Rosalind Pitt-Rivers (4 March 1907 – 14 January 1990) was a British biochemist, whose research focused mainly on the thyroid gland. In 1954, she was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. She was made a fellow of Bedford College, London, in 1973, an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1983, and an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1986. Photograph credit: National Institute for Medical Research; restored by Adam Cuerden Recently featured: Wat Xieng Thong Jupiter and Io White-throated kingfisher Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning resources Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara فارسی‎ עברית 한국어 Magyar Norsk Bokmål Română Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe 50,000+ articles Asturianu Bosanski Eesti Ελληνικά Simple English Galego Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски Norsk nynorsk Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1004593520" Navigation menu Personal ru.itis.search.tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 This page was last edited on 3 February 2021, at 11:11 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
