Westminster - Wikipedia Westminster From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Area of central London, within the City of Westminster For the wider London borough, see City of Westminster. For other uses, see Westminster (disambiguation). Human settlement in England Westminster The Palace of Westminster Western façade of Westminster Abbey Westminster Location within Greater London OS grid reference TQ295795 • Charing Cross 0.58 mi (0.9 km) NEbE London borough Westminster Ceremonial county Greater London Region London Country England Sovereign state United Kingdom Post town LONDON Postcode district SW1 Dialling code 020 Police Metropolitan Fire London Ambulance London UK Parliament Cities of London and Westminster London Assembly West Central List of places UK England London 51°29′41″N 00°08′07″W﻿ / ﻿51.49472°N 0.13528°W﻿ / 51.49472; -0.13528Coordinates: 51°29′41″N 00°08′07″W﻿ / ﻿51.49472°N 0.13528°W﻿ / 51.49472; -0.13528 Westminster is a district in central London, part of the wider City of Westminster. The area, which extends from the River Thames[1] to Oxford Street has many visitor attractions and historic landmarks, including the Palace of Westminster, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, Westminster Cathedral and much of the West End shopping and entertainment district. The name Westminster (Old English: Westmynstre)[2] originated from the informal description of the abbey church and royal peculiar of St Peter's (Westminster Abbey), located west of the City of London (until the Reformation there was also an Eastminster, near the Tower of London, in the East End of London). The abbey's origins date from between the 7th and 10th centuries, but it rose to national prominence when rebuilt by Edward the Confessor in the 11th. It has been the home of the permanent institutions of England's government continuously since about 1200, and from 1707 the British Government. In a government context, Westminster often refers to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, located in the UNESCO World Heritage Palace of Westminster — also known as the Houses of Parliament. The area is the centre of Her Majesty's Government, with Parliament in the Palace of Westminster and most of the major Government ministries known as Whitehall, itself the site of the royal palace that replaced that at Westminster. Contents 1 Geography 1.1 Physical Geography 1.2 Localities 1.3 Open spaces 2 Origins and administration 2.1 Legendary origin 2.2 Recorded origin 2.3 Local government 2.3.1 Parish of Westminster St Margaret 2.3.2 City and Liberty of Westminster 2.3.3 Metropolitan Borough of Westminster 3 History 3.1 Royal seat 3.2 Medieval and Tudor 3.3 Victorian divide 4 Wider uses of the term 5 Economy 5.1 High Commissions 5.2 Education 6 Notable people 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Geography[edit] Physical Geography[edit] The City and Liberty of Westminster and other Westminster administrative units (except the broader modern London Borough – known as the City of Westminster – created in 1965), extended from the River Thames to the old Roman Road from the City to western England, which is now locally called Oxford Street. {{{annotations}}} Westminster before urbanisation, the Roman Road (modern Oxford Street) is shown to the north Thorney Island lay between the arms of the former River Tyburn at its confluence with the Thames, while the western boundary with Chelsea was formed by the similarly lost River Westbourne.[3] The line of the river still forms (with very slight revisions) the boundaries of the modern borough with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Parishes and Places of the City and Liberty of Westminster. The lower Westbourne formed part of the western boundary, and Oxford Street the north Further north, away from the river mouth, Westminster included land on both sides of the Westbourne, notably Knightsbridge (including the parts of Hyde Park west of the Serpentine lake – originally formed by damming the Serpentine – and most of Kensington Gardens). Localities[edit] Westminster includes the sub-districts of Soho, St James, Mayfair, Covent Garden, Pimlico, Victoria, Belgravia and Knightsbridge (shared with neighbouring Kensington). Westminster merged with neighbouring Paddington and Marylebone in 1965 to form a larger modern borough, these neighbouring areas (except for a small area of Paddington in part of Kensington Gardens), lie north of Oxford Street. Open spaces[edit] The district's open spaces include: Hyde Park Kensington Gardens (part) Green Park Buckingham Palace Garden St James's Park Origins and administration[edit] The development of the area began with the establishment of the Abbey on a site then called Thorney Island, the choice of site may in part relate to the natural ford which is thought to have carried Watling Street over the Thames in the vicinity.[4] The wider district became known as Westminster in reference to the church. Legendary origin[edit] The legendary origin[5] is that in the early 7th century, a local fisherman named Edric (or Aldrich), ferried a stranger in tattered foreign clothing over the Thames to Thorney Island. It was a miraculous appearance of St Peter, a fisherman himself, coming to the island to consecrate the newly built church, which would subsequently develop into Westminster Abbey. He rewarded Edric with a bountiful catch when he next dropped his nets. Edric was instructed to present the King and St. Mellitus, Bishop of London with a salmon and various proofs that the consecration had already occurred . Every year on 29 June, St Peters day, the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers presents the Abbey with a salmon in memory of this event.[6] Recorded origin[edit] A charter of 785, possibly a forgery, grants land to the needy people of God in Thorney, in the dreadful spot which is called Westminster. The text suggests a pre-existing monastic community who chose to live in a very challenging location. The recorded origins of the Abbey (rather than a less important religious site) date to the 960s or early 970s, when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site.[7] Between 1042 and 1052, King Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St Peter's Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church. It was the first church in England built in the Romanesque style. The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065, only a week before Edward's death on 5 January 1066.[8] A week later, he was buried in the church; and, nine years later, his wife Edith was buried alongside him.[9] His successor, Harold II, was probably crowned in the abbey, although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later the same year.[10] St Peter's Abbey at the time of Edward's funeral, depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry The only extant depiction of Edward's abbey, together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster, is in the Bayeux Tapestry. Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory, an extension of the South Transept, survive in the Norman Undercroft of the Great School, including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey. Increased endowments supported a community that increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan's original foundation, up to a maximum of about eighty monks.[11] Local government[edit] The Metropolitan Borough of Westminster was almost co-terminous with the older City and Liberty of Westminster, with ancient Oxford Street as the northern boundary. Parish of Westminster St Margaret[edit] Most of the parishes of Westminster originated as daughter parishes of St Margaret's parish, in the City and Liberty of Westminster, Middlesex. The exceptions to this were St Clement Danes, St Mary le Strand and possibly some other small areas. The ancient parish was St Margaret; after 1727 this became the civil parish of 'St Margaret and St John', the latter a new church required for the increasing population. The area around Westminster Abbey formed the extra-parochial Close of the Collegiate Church of St Peter. Like many large parishes, Westminster was divided into smaller units called Hamlets (meaning a territorial sub-division, rather than a small village). These would later become independent daughter parishes. Until 1900 the local authority was the combined vestry of St Margaret and St John (also known as the Westminster District Board of Works from 1855 to 1887), which was based at Westminster Town Hall in Caxton Street from 1883.[12] City and Liberty of Westminster[edit] The Liberty of Westminster, governed by the Westminster Court of Burgesses, also included St Martin in the Fields and several other parishes and places. Westminster had its own quarter sessions, but the Middlesex sessions also had jurisdiction. Metropolitan Borough of Westminster[edit] Under local government reforms in 1889, the area fell within the newly created County of London, and the local government of Westminster was further reformed in 1900, when the court of burgesses and the parish vestries were abolished, and replaced by the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster. The borough was given city status at the same time, allowing it to be known as the City of Westminster and its council as Westminster City Council. The City and Liberty of Westminster and the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster were very similar in extent, covering the parts of the wider modern City of Westminster south of the Oxford Street, and its continuations Hyde Park Place. The exception is that part of Kensington Gardens, south of that road, are part of Paddington. Westminster merged with St Marylebone and Paddington in 1965, but the combined area was allowed to keep the title City of Westminster.[13] History[edit] For a list of street name etymologies for Westminster see Street names of Westminster Royal seat[edit] Bird's-eye view of Westminster in 1909 The former Thorney Island, the site of Westminster Abbey, formed the historic core of Westminster. The abbey became the traditional venue of the coronations of the kings and queens of England from that of Harold Godwinson (1066) onwards. From about 1200 the Palace of Westminster, near the abbey, became the principal royal residence, a transition marked by the transfer of royal treasury and financial records to Westminster from Winchester. Later the palace housed the developing Parliament and England's law courts. Thus London developed two focal points: the City of London (financial/economic) and Westminster (political and cultural). The monarchs moved their principal residence to the Palace of Whitehall (1530–1698), then to St James's Palace in 1698, and eventually to Buckingham Palace and other palaces after 1762. The main law courts moved to the Royal Courts of Justice in the late-19th century. Medieval and Tudor[edit] The settlement grew up around the palace and abbey, as a service area for them. The parish church, St Margaret's Westminster served the wider community of the parish; the servants of the palace and abbey as well as the rural population and those associated with the high status homes developing on the road from the City. The area became larger and in the Georgian period became connected through urban ribbon development with the City along the Strand. Henry VIII's Reformation in the early 16th century abolished the abbey and established a cathedral – thus the parish ranked as a "City", although it was only a fraction of the size of the City of London and the Borough of Southwark at that time. Indeed, the cathedral and diocesan status of the church lasted only from 1539 to 1556, but the "city" status remained for a mere parish within Middlesex. As such it is first known to have had two Members of Parliament in 1545 as a new Parliamentary Borough, centuries after the City of London and Southwark were enfranchised.[14] Victorian divide[edit] Part of Charles Booth's poverty map showing Westminster in 1889. The colours of the streets represent the economic class of the residents: Yellow ("Upper-middle and Upper classes, Wealthy"), red ("Lower middle class – Well-to-do middle class"), pink ("Fairly comfortable good ordinary earnings"), blue ("Intermittent or casual earnings"), and black ("lowest class occasional labourers, street sellers, loafers, criminals and semi-criminals"). Booth coloured Victoria Street, with its new shops and flats, yellow. The model dwellings built by the Peabody Trust on the side streets off Victoria Street appear as pink and grey, signalling modest respectability, while the black and blue streets represent the remaining slum areas housing the poorest.[15] Charles Booth's poverty map showing Westminster in 1889 recorded the full range of income- and capital-brackets living in adjacent streets within the area; its central western area had become (by 1850) (the) Devil's Acre in the southern flood-channel ravine of the River Tyburn, yet Victoria Street and other small streets and squares had the highest colouring of social class in London: yellow/gold. Westminster has shed the abject poverty with the clearance of this slum and with drainage improvement, but there is a typical Central London property distinction within the area which is very acute, epitomised by grandiose 21st-century developments, architectural high-point listed buildings[16] and nearby social housing (mostly non-council housing) buildings of the Peabody Trust founded by philanthropist George Peabody. Wider uses of the term[edit] Thus "Westminster", with its focus in public life from early history, is casually used as a metonym for Parliament and the political community of the United Kingdom generally. (The civil service is similarly referred to by the northern sub-neighbourhood it inhabits, "Whitehall".) "Westminster" is consequently also used in reference to the Westminster system, the parliamentary model of democratic government that has evolved in the United Kingdom and for those other nations, particularly in the Commonwealth of Nations and other parts of the former British Empire that adopted it. The term "Westminster Village", sometimes used in the context of British politics, does not refer to a geographical area at all; employed especially in the phrase "Westminster Village gossip", it denotes a supposedly close social circle of members of parliament, political journalists, so-called spin doctors and others connected to events in the Palace of Westminster and Government ministries. Panorama of Westminster taken from the roof of the Methodist Central Hall Economy[edit] The area has a substantial residential population. By the 20th Century Westminster has seen rising numbers of residential apartments with wealthy inhabitants. Hotels, large Victorian homes and barracks exist near to Buckingham Palace. High Commissions[edit] Westminster hosts the High Commissions of many Commonwealth countries: Australia The Bahamas Brunei Canada Cyprus Eswatini Ghana India Lesotho Malaysia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Papua New Guinea Seychelles Singapore South Africa Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Education[edit] Within the area is Westminster School, a major public school which grew out of the abbey, and the University of Westminster, attended by over 20,000 students. Notable people[edit] Arthur Barnby (1881–1937), first-class cricketer and Royal Marines/Royal Naval Air Service officer Richard Colley (1833–1902), first-class cricketer and British Army officer Geoffrey Cooke (1897–1980), first-class cricketer and British Army officer John Fuller (1834–1893), first-class cricketer, clergyman and theologian Hady Ghandour (born 2000), footballer Tatiana Hambro (born 1989), fashion writer and editor Tom Hiddleston (born 1981), Golden Globe-winning actor Dua Lipa (born 1995), singer and songwriter Eddie Redmayne (born 1982), Oscar-winning actor Quintin Twiss (1835–1900), first-class cricketer and stage actor References[edit] Notes ^ "London's Places" (PDF). London Plan. Greater London Authority. 2011. p. 46. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2012. Retrieved 27 May 2014. ^ "Manuscript C: Cotton Tiberius C.i". asc.jebbo.co.uk. Retrieved 24 November 2018. 'On þisum geare com Harold kyng of Eoforwic to Westmynstre' ^ Boundary of Westminster and Chelsea 'The parish of Chelsea: Introduction', in A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 12, Chelsea, ed. Patricia E C Croot (London, 2004), pp. 1-2. British History Online http://www.british-history.ac.uk/vch/middx/vol12/pp1-2 [accessed 19 December 2020]. ^ "Loftie's Historic London (review)". The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art. 63 (1, 634): 271. 19 February 1887. Retrieved 21 October 2015. ^ http://www.choirschools.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/The-Abbey-Fishy-Tale.pdf ^ pixeltocode.uk, PixelToCode. "Fishmongers' Company". Westminster Abbey. ^ Page, William (1909). "'Benedictine monks: St Peter's abbey, Westminster', in A History of the County of London: Volume 1, London Within the Bars, Westminster and Southwark". London. pp. 433–457. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. ^ Eric Fernie, in Mortimer ed., Edward the Confessor, pp. 139–143 ^ Pauline Stafford, 'Edith, Edward's Wife and Queen', in Mortimer ed., Edward the Confessor, p. 137 ^ "William I (the Conqueror)". Westminster-abbey.org. 2016. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. ^ Harvey 1993, p. 2 ^ GLA planning report PDU/0583/01 Archived 17 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine 2003 ^ "Local Government Act 1963". Legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 25 April 2020. ^ "Westminster | History of Parliament Online". www.historyofparliamentonline.org. ^ Richard, Dennis (2008). Cities in Modernity: Representations and Productions of Metropolitan Space. Cambridge University Press. p. 140. ISBN 978-0-521-46841-1. ^ "OS Map with Listed Buildings". English Heritage. Archived from the original on 10 April 2011. Bibliography Manchee, W. H. (1924), The Westminster City Fathers (the Burgess Court of Westminster) 1585–1901: Being some account of their powers and domestic rule of the City prior to its incorporation in 1901; with a foreword by Walter G. Bell and 36 illustrations which relate to documents (some pull-outs) and artefacts. London: John Lane (The Bodley Head). Davies, E. A. (1952), An Account of the Formation and Early Years of The Westminster Fire Office; (Includes black-and-white photographic plates with a colour frontispiece of 'A Waterman' and a foreword by Major K. M. Beaumont. London: Country Life Limited for the Westminster Fire Office. Hunting, P. (1981), Royal Westminster. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. Printed by Penshurst Press. ISBN 0-85406-127-4 (paper); ISBN 0-85406-128-2 (cased). Further reading[edit] Timbs, John (1867), "Westminster", Curiosities of London (2nd ed.), London: J.C. Hotten, OCLC 12878129 External links[edit] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Westminster. Westminster Borough Council Westminster Walks – from Findlay Muirhead's 1927 guidebook to London and its Environs Westminster, by Sir Walter Besant and Geraldine Edith Mitton and A. Murray Smith, 1902, from Project Gutenberg Palmer's Village, a deserted village in Westminster v t e City of Westminster Districts Adelphi and Aldwych (see also Strand) Bayswater Belgravia Covent Garden Fitzrovia Hyde Park (in commercial use) Kilburn Knightsbridge Lisson Grove Maida Vale including Little Venice Marylebone Mayfair Millbank Paddington including Paddington Green Pimlico Queen's Park St James's St John's Wood Soho including Chinatown Victoria Westbourne Green Westminster Attractions Apsley House Banqueting House Benjamin Franklin House British Dental Association Museum British Optical Association Museum Buckingham Palace Canada House Gallery Churchill War Rooms Clarence House Courtauld Gallery Crime Museum Faraday Museum Fleming Museum Guards Museum Handel & Hendrix Horse Guards Household Cavalry Museum Hunterian Museum Institute of Contemporary Arts Kennel Club Dog Art Gallery London Film Museum London Transport Museum Madame Tussauds Mall Galleries National Gallery Queen's Gallery Royal Academy of Arts Royal Academy of Music Museum Royal Mews Sherlock Holmes Museum Somerset House Spencer House Tate Britain Trafalgar Square Twinings Museum Two Temple Place Wellington Arch West End theatre Westminster Abbey London Zoo Parks and open spaces Green Park Hyde Park Kensington Gardens Regent's Park St James's Park Constituencies Cities of London and Westminster Westminster North Local government Borough council Elections 2010 2014 2018 Bridges Chelsea Bridge Grosvenor Bridge Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges Lambeth Bridge Vauxhall Bridge Waterloo Bridge Westminster Bridge Rail and tube stations Baker Street Bayswater Bond Street Charing Cross Charing Cross Edgware Road Edgware Road Embankment Great Portland Street Green Park Hyde Park Corner Lancaster Gate Leicester Square Maida Vale Marble Arch Marylebone Oxford Circus Paddington Paddington Paddington Piccadilly Circus Pimlico Queensway Regent's Park Royal Oak St. James's Park St. John's Wood Temple Tottenham Court Road Victoria Warwick Avenue Westbourne Park Westminster Art and architecture Grade I listed buildings Grade II* listed buildings 1–9 A–Z Public art Other topics Blue plaques People Schools Category Commons v t e Areas of London Central activities zone Bloomsbury City of London wards Holborn Marylebone Mayfair Paddington Pimlico Soho Southwark Vauxhall Waterloo Westminster Town centre network International Knightsbridge West End Metropolitan Bromley Croydon Ealing Harrow Hounslow Ilford Kingston Romford Shepherd's Bush Stratford Sutton Uxbridge Wood Green Major Angel Barking Bexleyheath Brixton Camden Town Canary Wharf Catford Chiswick Clapham Junction Dalston East Ham Edgware Eltham Enfield Town Fulham Hammersmith Holloway Nags Head Kensington High Street Kilburn King's Road East Lewisham Orpington Peckham Putney Queensway/Westbourne Grove Richmond Southall Streatham Tooting Walthamstow Wandsworth Wembley Wimbledon Woolwich Districts (principal) Acton Beckenham Belgravia Bethnal Green Brentford Camberwell Canada Water Carshalton Chadwell Heath Chingford Clapham Crystal Palace Coulsdon Cricklewood Dagenham Deptford Dulwich Edmonton Elephant and Castle Erith Feltham Finchley Forest Gate Forest Hill Golders Green Greenwich Harlesden Hampstead Harringay Hayes (Hillingdon) Hendon Hornchurch Kentish Town Leyton Mill Hill Mitcham Morden Muswell Hill New Cross New Malden Northwood Notting Hill Penge Pinner Purley Ruislip Sidcup Southgate South Norwood Stanmore Stoke Newington Surbiton Sydenham Teddington Thamesmead Tolworth Tulse Hill Twickenham Upminster Upper Norwood Wanstead Wealdstone Welling West Ham West Hampstead West Norwood Whitechapel Willesden Green Woodford Neighbourhoods (principal) Abbey Wood Alperton Anerley Archway Barnes Barnsbury Battersea Beckton Bedford Park Bermondsey Bow Brent Cross Brockley Canonbury Charlton Chelsea Chessington Chipping Barnet Chislehurst Clerkenwell Elmers End Gidea Park Greenford Gunnersbury Hackbridge Hackney Ham Hampton Hanwell Hanworth Harold Wood Highams Park Highbury Highgate Hillingdon Hook Holloway Hoxton Ickenham Isle of Dogs Isleworth Islington Kensal Green Kew Lambeth Manor Park Mortlake Neasden Northolt Nunhead Plaistow (Newham) Poplar Roehampton Rotherhithe Seven Kings Seven Sisters Shoreditch Stamford Hill Stepney St Helier Surrey Quays Tottenham Upper Clapton Upper Holloway Walworth Wapping West Drayton Worcester Park Yiewsley Lists of areas by borough Barking and Dagenham Barnet Bexley Brent Bromley Camden Croydon Ealing Enfield Greenwich Hackney Hammersmith and Fulham Haringey Harrow Havering Hillingdon Hounslow Islington Kensington and Chelsea Kingston upon Thames Lambeth Lewisham Merton Newham Redbridge Richmond upon Thames Southwark Sutton Tower Hamlets Waltham Forest Wandsworth Westminster Fictional Canley (borough) (The Bill: TV soap) Charnham (suburb) (Family Affairs: TV soap) London Below (magical realm) (Neverwhere: TV series, novel) Walford (borough) (EastEnders: TV soap) Authority control LCCN: n80153126 NKC: ge217219 VIAF: 139492016 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n80153126 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Westminster&oldid=1006987975" Categories: Districts of the City of Westminster Areas of London Market towns in London Districts of London on the River Thames Hidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from June 2013 Use dmy dates from December 2020 Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with OS grid coordinates Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal ru.itis.search.tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Languages Ænglisc العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kernowek Кыргызча Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Yorùbá Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 15 February 2021, at 22:06 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
