Numismatics - Wikipedia Numismatics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about numismatics as an academic discipline. For collecting, see Coin collecting. Study of currencies, coins and paper money Numismatics Currency Coins Banknotes Forgery List ISO Circulating currencies Africa The Americas Europe Asia Oceania Local currencies Company scrip LETS Time dollars Fictional currencies Proposed currencies History Historical currencies Greek Roman China India Persian Tibetan Thai Filipino Malay Byzantine Medieval currencies Production Mint Designers Coining Milling Hammering Cast Exonumia Credit cards Medals Tokens Cheques Notaphily Banknotes Scripophily Stocks Bonds Glossary of numismatics  Numismatics portal  Money portal v t e Numismatics is the study or collection of currency, including coins, tokens, paper money and related objects. While numismatists are often characterised as students or collectors of coins, the discipline also includes the broader study of money and other payment media used to resolve debts and the exchange of goods. Early money used by people is referred to as "Odd and Curious", but the use of other goods in barter exchange is excluded, even where used as a circulating currency (e.g., cigarettes in prison). As an example, the Kyrgyz people used horses as the principal currency unit and gave small change in lambskins;[1] the lambskins may be suitable for numismatic study, but the horses are not. Many objects have been used for centuries, such as cowry shells, precious metals, cocoa beans, large stones, and gems. Contents 1 Etymology 2 History of money 3 History of numismatics 3.1 Modern numismatics 3.2 Subfields 4 Numismatists 5 List of publicly displayed numismatic collections 6 List of important numismatic scholars 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Etymology[edit] First attested in English 1829, the word numismatics comes from the adjective numismatic, meaning "of coins". It was borrowed in 1792 from French numismatiques, itself a derivation from Late Latin numismatis, genitive of numisma, a variant of nomisma meaning "coin".[2] Nomisma is a latinisation of the Greek νόμισμα (nomisma) which means "current coin/custom",[3] which derives from νομίζω (nomizō), "to hold or own as a custom or usage, to use customarily",[4] in turn from νόμος (nomos), "usage, custom",[5] ultimately from νέμω (nemō), "I dispense, divide, assign, keep, hold".[6] History of money[edit] Main article: History of money Throughout its history, money itself has been made to be a scarce good, although it does not have to be. Many materials have been used to form money, from naturally scarce precious metals and cowry shells through cigarettes to entirely artificial money, called fiat money, such as banknotes. Many complementary currencies use time as a unit of measure, using mutual credit accounting that keeps the balance of money intact. Modern money (and most ancient money too) is essentially a token – an abstraction. Paper currency is perhaps the most common type of physical money today. However, goods such as gold or silver retain many of the essential properties of money, such as volatility and limited supply. However, these goods are not controlled by one single authority. History of numismatics[edit] A Roman denarius, a standardized silver coin. Coin collecting may have possibly existed in ancient times. Caesar Augustus gave "coins of every device, including old pieces of the kings and foreign money" as Saturnalia gifts.[7] Petrarch, who wrote in a letter that he was often approached by vinediggers with old coins asking him to buy or to identify the ruler, is credited as the first Renaissance collector. Petrarch presented a collection of Roman coins to Emperor Charles IV in 1355. The first book on coins was De Asse et Partibus (1514) by Guillaume Budé.[8] During the early Renaissance ancient coins were collected by European royalty and nobility. Collectors of coins were Pope Boniface VIII, Emperor Maximilian of the Holy Roman Empire, Louis XIV of France, Ferdinand I, Elector Joachim II of Brandenburg who started the Berlin coin cabinet and Henry IV of France to name a few. Numismatics is called the "Hobby of Kings", due to its most esteemed founders. Professional societies organised in the 19th century. The Royal Numismatic Society was founded in 1836 and immediately began publishing the journal that became the Numismatic Chronicle. The American Numismatic Society was founded in 1858 and began publishing the American Journal of Numismatics in 1866. In 1931 the British Academy launched the Sylloge Nummorum Graecorum publishing collections of Ancient Greek coinage. The first volume of Sylloge of Coins of the British Isles was published in 1958. In the 20th century coins gained recognition as archaeological objects, scholars such as Guido Bruck of the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna realised their value in providing a temporal context and the difficulty that curators faced when identifying worn coins using classical literature. After World War II in Germany a project, Fundmünzen der Antike (Coin finds of the Classical Period) was launched, to register every coin found within Germany. This idea found successors in many countries. In the United States, the US mint established a coin cabinet in 1838 when chief coiner Adam Eckfeldt donated his personal collection.[9] William E. Du Bois’ Pledges of History... (1846) describes the cabinet. C. Wyllys Betts' American colonial history illustrated by contemporary medals (1894) set the groundwork for the study of American historical medals. Helen Wang's "A short history of Chinese numismatics in European languages" (2012-2013) gives an outline history of Western countries' understanding of Chinese numismatics.[10] Lyce Jankowski's Les amis des monnaies is an in-depth study of Chinese numismatics in China in the 19th century.[11] Modern numismatics[edit] Two 20 kr gold coins from the Scandinavian Monetary Union. Modern numismatics is the study of the coins of the mid-17th century onward, the period of machine-struck coins.[12] Their study serves more the need of collectors than historians and it is more often successfully pursued by amateur aficionados than by professional scholars. The focus of modern numismatics lies frequently in the research of production and use of money in historical contexts using mint or other records in order to determine the relative rarity of the coins they study. Varieties, mint-made errors, the results of progressive die wear, mintage figures and even the sociopolitical context of coin mintings are also matters of interest. Subfields[edit] Main articles: Exonumia, Notaphily, and Scripophily Exonumia (UK English: Paranumismatica)[13] is the study of coin-like objects such as token coins and medals, and other items used in place of legal currency or for commemoration. This includes elongated coins, encased coins, souvenir medallions, tags, badges, counterstamped coins, wooden nickels, credit cards, and other similar items. It is related to numismatics proper (concerned with coins which have been legal tender), and many coin collectors are also exonumists. Notaphily is the study of paper money or banknotes. It is believed that people have been collecting paper money for as long as it has been in use. However, people only started collecting paper money systematically in Germany in the 1920s, particularly the Serienscheine (Series notes) Notgeld. The turning point occurred in the 1970s, when notaphily was established as a separate area by collectors. At the same time, some developed countries such as the United States, Germany and France began publishing their respective national catalogues of paper money, which represented major points of reference literature. Alexander the Great tetradrachm from the Temnos Mint circa 188-170 BC Scripophily is the study and collection of stocks and Bonds. It is an area of collecting due to both the inherent beauty of some historical documents as well as the interesting historical context of each document. Some stock certificates are excellent examples of engraving. Occasionally an old stock document will be found that still has value as a stock in a successor company. Numismatists[edit] The term numismatist applies to collectors and coin dealers as well as scholars using coins as source or studying coins.[14] The first group chiefly derive pleasure from the simple ownership of monetary devices and studying these coins as private amateur scholars. In the classical field amateur collector studies have achieved quite remarkable progress in the field. Examples are Walter Breen, a well-known example of a noted numismatist who was not an avid collector, and King Farouk I of Egypt was an avid collector[15] who had very little interest in numismatics. Harry Bass by comparison was a noted collector who was also a numismatist. The second group are the coin dealers. Often called professional numismatists, they authenticate or grade coins for commercial purposes. The buying and selling of coin collections by numismatists who are professional dealers advances the study of money, and expert numismatists are consulted by historians, museum curators, and archaeologists. The third category are scholar numismatists working in public collections, universities or as independent scholars acquiring knowledge about monetary devices, their systems, their economy and their historical context.[16] An example would be G. Kenneth Jenkins. Coins are especially relevant as source in the pre-modern period. List of publicly displayed numismatic collections[edit] Main article: List of numismatic collections Country State/City Description (Museum Name, etc.) Argentina Retiro, Buenos Aires Casa de Moneda de la República Argentina Morocco Rabat, Morocco Sahara Museum Armenia Yerevan History Museum of Armenia Austria Vienna Kunsthistorisches Museum Bahrain Manama Central Bank of Bahrain Currency Museum Bangladesh Dhaka Bangladesh Bank Taka Museum Belgium Brussels Coins and Medals Department of the Royal Library of Belgium Belgium Brussels National Bank of Belgium Museum Brazil Brasília Central Bank Museum Brazil Rio de Janeiro National Historical Museum Brazil Rio de Janeiro Banco do Brasil's Cultural Center Brazil São Paulo Instituto Itaú Cultural Brunei Bandar Seri Begawan Currency Gallery Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Sofia Bulgarian National Bank Museum Canada Ottawa Currency Museum Bank of Canada China Beijing Museum Special: China Numismatic Museum CCTV News – CNTV English China Shanghai Shanghai Museum Colombia Bogotá Casa de Moneda de Colombia Costa Rica San José Numismatic Museum Cuba Havana Numismatic Museum Denmark Copenhagen National Museum of Denmark Ecuador Quito Museo Numismático del Ecuador France Paris Cabinet des Médailles, Bibliothèque nationale de France France Paris Monnaie de Paris Georgia Tbilisi National Bank of Georgia Germany Berlin Bode Museum, Museumsinsel Germany Dresden Coin Cabinet in Royal Palace/Münzkabinett im Residenzschloss Germany Frankfurt Numismatic Museum/Münzkabinett Historisches Museum Frankfurt Germany Jena Oriental Coin Cabinet Jena Germany Munich Staatliche Münzsammlung Munchen Greece Athens Numismatic Museum of Athens Guatemala Guatemala City Museo Numismático de Guatemala Hungary Budapest Visitor centre of the Hungarian National Bank India New Delhi National Museum, New Delhi India Mumbai Reserve Bank of India Museum India Nasik Coin Museum, Nasik India Chennai Government Museum Indonesia Jakarta Bank Indonesia Museum Collection : Money Indonesia Purbalingga Museum Uang Purbalingga Israel Jerusalem Israel Museum Italy Florence Museo della Moneta a Firenze Italy Florence National Archaeological Museum in Florence Italy Lucca Lucca Mint/Zecca di Lucca Italy Naples Naples National Archaeological Museum Italy Rome National Museum of Rome Crypta Balbi/Museo Nazionale Romano: Crypta Balbi Italy Rome Banca d'Italia School groups only and by appointment only. Banca d'Italia Museo della Moneta Italy Rome Vatican Philatelic and Numismatic Museum/ Museo Filatelico e Numismatico Italy Venice Museo Correr Japan Tokyo Bank of Japan Money – IMES BOJ Currency Museum Lebanon Tripoli The Northern Lebanon & Akkar Museum Malaysia Kuala Lumpur, Federal Territory Bank Negara Malaysia Museum and Art Gallery Mexico Mexico City Casa de Moneda de México Morocco Rabat Bank Al Maghrib (Bank of Morocco) Museum Nepal Kathmandu National Museum of Nepal Netherlands Amsterdam Numismatic collection of De Nederlandse Bank North Macedonia Skopje Narodna Banka na Republika Severna Makedonija Paraguay Asuncion Numismatica Independencia Pakistan Karachi SBP Museum Peru Lima Museo Numismático del Perú Philippines Manila Museo ng Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Poland Cracow The Emeryk Hutten-Czapski Museum Portugal Lisbon Museu Numismático Português Qatar Doha Sheikh Faisal Bin Qassim Al Thani Museum Romania Bucharest The Museum of the National Bank of Romania Russia St. Petersburg Hermitage Museum Russia St. Petersburg The Russian Money Museum Sri Lanka Colombo Currency museum, Colombo Serbia Belgrade National Bank of Serbia (Народна Банка Србије) Singapore Singapore Singapore Coins and Notes Museum Slovakia Košice The Košice Gold Treasure EASTERN SLOVAK MUSEUM Spain Madrid Museo Casa de la Moneda Spain Barcelona Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya, numismatic collection South Africa Johannesburg Absa Money Museum Suriname Paramaribo Numismatic Museum of the Centrale Bank van Suriname Sweden Stockholm Royal Coin Cabinet Sweden Uppsala Uppsala University Coin Cabinet Switzerland Zurich Money Museum Thailand Bangkok Pavilion of Regalia, Royal Decorations and Coins e-museum Trinidad and Tobago Port of Spain Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago museum Ukraine Odessa Odessa Numismatics Museum Ukraine Feodosiya Feodosia Money Museum United Arab Emirates Emirate of Dubai Coins Museum Dubai[17] United Arab Emirates Emirate of Abu Dhabi UAE Currency Museum[18] United Kingdom Cambridge Fitzwilliam Museum United Kingdom Glasgow Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery[19] United Kingdom Birmingham Barber Institute of Fine Arts, Birmingham University United Kingdom London British Museum Department of Coins and Medals United Kingdom London Bank of England Museum United Kingdom Llantrisant Royal Mint Museum United Kingdom Manchester Manchester Museum[20] United Kingdom Oxford Ashmolean Museum United States Colorado Springs American Numismatic Association Money Museum United States Washington, D.C. National Numismatic Collection (NNC), Smithsonian National Museum of American History Uruguay Montevideo Museo del Gaucho y la Moneda List of important numismatic scholars[edit] See also: List of coin collectors Andreas Alföldi (1895–1981) Augusto Carlos Teixeira de Aragão Marion Archibald (1935-2016) Simone Assemani (1752–1820) Churchill Babington Anselmo Banduri Georges Bataille Osmund Bopearachchi Bartolomeo Borghesi Guido Bruck Guillaume Budé Francesco Carelli Celestino Cavedoni Joan Clarke Henry Cohen Joe Cribb[21] Théophile Marion Dumersan Stephan Ladislaus Endlicher Giuseppe Fiorelli Martin Folkes Julius Friedländer Andrea Fulvio Raffaele Garrucci Francesco Gnecchi Philip Grierson Claude Gros de Boze P. L. Gupta Nicola Francesco Haym (1678–1729) Stefan Heidemann David Hendin Gene Hessler G. Kenneth Jenkins[22] Joel L. Malter Harold Mattingly Theodor Mommsen B. N. Mukherjee A. K. Narain Eric P. Newman Carlo Ottavio, Count Castiglione Martin Price (numismatist) Louis Robert Desiré-Raoul Rochette Joaquín Rubio y Muñoz Eduard Rüppell Antonio Salinas Gustave Schlumberger Charles Seltman Camillo Serafini Ajay Mitra Shastri Adolf Soetbeer Dmitry Sontsov Frederic Soret Johann Gustav Stickel Charles Surasky Francois Thierry[23] Olaus Gerhard Tychsen Jörgen Zoega See also[edit] Numismatist (specialist) Awards for numismatics Numismatic associations List of numismatic collections List of numismatic journals Silk Road Numismatics Coin collecting Coin grading Coin catalog Coin roll hunting – searching coin rolls for coins of numismatic value Glossary of numismatics Joseph Pellerin Commodity money Money creation Where's George? Where's Willy? Auction catalog Exchange rate Manillas – a form of primitive or archaic money. World Money Fair Leper colony money List of most expensive coins Philately References[edit] ^ Glyn Davies (1996). Chronology of Money 1900 — 1919. ISBN 978-0-7083-1351-0. Archived from the original on 2006-07-14. Retrieved 2006-08-09. ^ nomisma Archived 2012-10-08 at the Wayback Machine, Charlton T. Lewis, Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary, on Perseus ^ νόμισμα Archived 2012-10-08 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ νομίζω Archived 2012-10-08 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ νόμος Archived 2011-12-09 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ νέμω Archived 2012-10-08 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ Suetonius, Augustus 75 on-line text Archived 2007-07-26 at WebCite. ^ Brigham Young University library web page Archived 2008-07-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kent, Allen (1985). Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. p. 281. ISBN 978-0-8247-2037-7. ^ Helen Wang, "A short history of Chinese numismatics in European languages", in Early China vols 35-36 (2012-2013), pp. 395-429, ^ Jankowski, Lyce (2018). Les amis des monnaies – la sociabilité savante des collectionneurs et numismates chinois de la fin des Qing. Paris: Maisonneuve et Larose nlle édition. ISBN 978-2-37701-030-1. ^ "Collectibles". Maritime International. Archived from the original on September 14, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013. ^ The First Dictionary of Paranumismatica: All About Tokens, Checks, Tickets, Passes, Medalets, Counters, Tallies and Weights (ed. Brian Edge), 1991. ISBN 978-0951691007 ^ "numismatist". thefreedictionary. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved September 18, 2014. ^ Lester, Carl N. "Numismatic "Gumshoe:" On the Trail of King Farouk". Gold Rush Gallery. Archived from the original on 2017-02-27. Retrieved 2013-06-13. ^ "An Overview of Numismatics". Gainesville Coins. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2013. ^ "Coin Museum". dubaiculture.gov.ae. Retrieved 2019-08-13. ^ "UAE Currency Museum". visitabudhabi.ae. Archived from the original on 2019-08-13. Retrieved 2019-08-13. ^ University of Glasgow :: Collections :: Collections Summary :: Coins and Medals Archived 2011-11-10 at the Wayback Machine. Gla.ac.uk. Retrieved on 2011-11-24. ^ Money. Manchester Museum ^ Joe Cribb Archived 2008-07-23 at the Wayback Machine. British Museum. Retrieved on 2011-11-24. ^ John Morcom (July 28, 2005). "Obituary: Kenneth Jenkins". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 24, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2013. ^ Francois Thierry | Bibliothèque nationale de France – Academia.edu Archived 2012-04-25 at the Wayback Machine. Bnf.academia.edu. Retrieved on 2011-11-24. External links[edit] The dictionary definition of numismatics at Wiktionary Media related to Numismatics at Wikimedia Commons v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders, decorations, and medals Distinctions (Lists) By conferee Founts of honour* States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial (Self-styled order) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Colonial order Order of merit Royal family order Titles (Styles, Post-nominal By function Grand Master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross/Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight/Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military (List) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian (List) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Literature Poetry Art History Music Architecture Theatre Film Science Religions Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia (Named after people) For wearing (decorations) Formal Collar Grand Cross/Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Ring Button Campaign Service Prizes Trophy Plaquette Rosette Money Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Fraternity Fraternal order Confraternity Secret society Guild Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission on Orders of Chivalry Related concepts Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards Numismatics portal Business and economics portal Money portal Authority control GND: 4172175-5 NARA: 10643510 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Numismatics&oldid=1004510564" Categories: Numismatics Currency Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template webcite links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Navigation menu Personal ru.itis.search.tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 2 February 2021, at 23:36 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
