Armiger - Wikipedia Armiger From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Person entitled to bear a coat of arms For other uses, see Armiger (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Armiger" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Look up armiger in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Part of a series on Heraldic achievement External devices in addition to the central coat of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto  Heraldry portal v t e In heraldry, an armiger is a person entitled to use a heraldic achievement (e.g., bear arms, an "armour-bearer") either by hereditary right, grant, matriculation, or assumption of arms. Such a person is said to be armigerous. A family or a clan likewise. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Modern period 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Etymology[edit] The Latin word armiger literally means "arms-bearer". In high and late medieval England, the word referred to an esquire attendant upon a knight, but bearing his own unique armorial device. [1] Armiger was also used as a Latin cognomen, and is now found as a rare surname in English-speaking countries. Modern period[edit] Today, the term armiger is well-defined only within jurisdictions, such as Canada, the Republic of Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom, where heraldry is regulated by the state or a heraldic body, such as the College of Arms, the Chief Herald of Canada, the Court of the Lord Lyon or the Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland. A person can be so entitled either by proven (and typically agnatic) descent from a person with a right to bear a heraldic achievement, or by virtue of a grant of arms to himself. Merely sharing the same family name of an armiger is insufficient. Most of the time, the usage of a heraldic achievement is governed by legal restrictions; these restrictions are independent of the copyright status and independent of a coat of arms depiction. A coat of arms represents its owner. Though it can be freely represented, it cannot be appropriated, or used in such a way as to create a confusion with or a prejudice to its owner. In the Netherlands, titles of nobility are regulated by law but heraldry is not. In Sweden and Finland the nobility has had, since 1762, the prerogative to use an open helmet, while others use a closed helmet. See also[edit] Heraldic Achievement – Full display or depiction of all the heraldic components to which the bearer of a coat of arms is entitled Heraldry – Profession, study, or art of creating, granting, and blazoning arms and ruling on questions of rank or protocol Law of heraldic arms Women in heraldry References[edit] ^ Dictionary of Chivalry, Uden. Kestrel Books, Harmondsworth, 1968. ISBN 0-7226-5372-7 Further reading[edit] Coss, Peter R. "Knights, esquires and the origins of social gradation in England." Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, Sixth Series, 5 (1995): 155-78. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources This heraldry-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armiger&oldid=992327865" Categories: Heraldry stubs Heraldry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references All stub articles Navigation menu Personal ru.itis.search.tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Català Čeština Español Italiano Македонски Polski Simple English Српски / srpski Edit links This page was last edited on 4 December 2020, at 18:11 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
