Franc - Wikipedia Franc From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Franc (disambiguation). Not to be confused with Franks. Name of several currency units Franc 1 Swiss franc 1983 1 French franc 1991 5 Belgian francs 1994 1 Luxembourg franc 1990 1 Monegasque franc 1978 100 Saar francs 1956 The franc is any of several units of currency. The French franc was the currency of France until the euro was adopted in 1999 (by law, 2002 de facto). The Swiss franc is a major world currency today due to the prominence of Swiss financial institutions. The name is said to derive from the Latin inscription francorum rex (Style of the French sovereign: King of the Franks) used on early French coins and until the 18th century, or from the French franc, meaning "frank" (and "free" in certain contexts, such as coup franc, "free kick" ). The countries that use francs include Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and most of Francophone Africa. Before the introduction of the euro, francs were also used in France, Belgium and Luxembourg, while Andorra and Monaco accepted the French franc as legal tender (Monegasque franc). The franc was also used within the French Empire's colonies, including Algeria and Cambodia. The franc is sometimes Italianised or Hispanicised as the franco, for instance in Luccan franco. One franc is typically divided into 100 centimes. The French franc symbol was F or Fr.; the symbol ₣ was suggested in France by Prime Minister Édouard Balladur, but it was never used. For practical reasons, the banks and the financial markets used the abbreviation FF for the French franc in order to distinguish it from the Belgian franc (FB), the Luxembourgish franc (FL or FLux), et cetera. In the Luxembourgish language, the word for franc is Frang, plural form Frangen. Contents 1 Origins 2 French franc 3 CFA and CFP francs 4 Comorian franc 5 Belgian franc and Luxembourgish franc 6 Swiss franc and Liechtenstein franc 7 Saar franc 8 Countries that use a franc 8.1 Countries currently using a franc 8.1.1 Current 8.1.1.1 Collectivities franc 8.1.2 Defunct 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Origins[edit] The first franc ever minted, the franc à cheval, was minted upon Jean le Bon's return from captivity from 5 December 1360, and featured combative imagery. Gold, 24 karats, 3.73 g. It conveniently coincided with the account value of one livre tournois. The franc was originally a French gold coin of 3.87 g minted in 1360 on the occasion of the release of King John II ("the good"), held by the English since his capture at the Battle of Poitiers four years earlier. It was equivalent to one livre tournois (Tours pound). French franc[edit] The French franc was originally a gold coin issued in France from 1360 until 1380,[1] then a silver coin issued between 1575 and 1641.[2] The franc finally became the national currency from 1795 until 1999 (franc coins and notes were legal tender until 2002). Though abolished as a legal coin by Louis XIII in 1641 in favor of the gold louis and silver écu, the term franc continued to be used in common parlance for the livre tournois. The franc was also minted for many of the former French colonies, such as Morocco, Algeria, French West Africa, and others. Today, after independence, many of these countries continue to use the franc as their standard denomination. The value of the French franc was locked to the euro at 1 euro = 6.55957 FRF on 31 December 1998, and after the introduction of the euro notes and coins, ceased to be legal tender after 28 February 2002, although they were still exchangeable at banks until 19 February 2012.[3] CFA and CFP francs[edit] Fourteen African countries use the franc CFA (in west Africa, Communauté financière africaine; in equatorial Africa, Coopération financière en Afrique centrale), originally (1945) worth 1.7 French francs and then from 1948, 2 francs (from 1960: 0.02 new franc) but after January 1994 worth only 0.01 French franc. Therefore, from January 1999, 1 CFA franc is equivalent to €0.00152449. On 22 December 2019, it was announced that the CFA franc would be replaced in 2020 by an independent currency to be called Eco.[4] A separate (franc CFP) circulates in France's Pacific territories, worth €0.0084 (formerly 0.055 French franc). Comorian franc[edit] In 1981, The Comoros established an arrangement with the French government similar to that of the CFA franc. Originally, 50 Comorian francs were worth 1 French franc. In January 1994, the rate was changed to 75 Comorian francs to the French franc. Since 1999, the currency has been pegged to the euro. Belgian franc and Luxembourgish franc[edit] Main articles: Belgian franc and Luxembourgish franc The conquest of most of western Europe by Revolutionary and Napoleonic France led to the franc's wide circulation. Following independence from the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the new Kingdom of Belgium in 1832 adopted its own Belgian franc, equivalent to the French one, followed by Luxembourg adopting the Luxembourgish franc in 1848 and Switzerland in 1850. Newly unified Italy adopted the lira on a similar basis in 1862. In 1865, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Italy created the Latin Monetary Union (to be joined by Spain and Greece in 1868): each would possess a national currency unit (franc, lira, peseta, drachma) worth 4.5 g of silver or 0.290322 g of gold (fine), all freely exchangeable at a rate of 1:1. In the 1870s the gold value was made the fixed standard, a situation which was to continue until 1914. In 1926 Belgium as well as France experienced depreciation and an abrupt collapse of confidence, leading to the introduction of a new gold currency for international transactions, the belga of 5 francs, and the country's withdrawal from the monetary union, which ceased to exist at the end of the year. The 1921 monetary union of Belgium and Luxembourg survived, however, forming the basis for full economic union in 1932. Like the French franc, the Belgo-Luxemburgish franc ceased to exist on 1 January 1999, when it became fixed at 1 EUR = 40.3399 BEF/LUF, thus a franc was worth €0.024789. Old franc coins and notes lost their legal tender status on 28 February 2002. 1 Luxembourgish franc was equal to 1 Belgian franc. Belgian francs were legal tender inside Luxembourg, and Luxembourgish francs were legal tender in the whole of Belgium. (In reality, Luxembourgish francs were only accepted as means of payment by shops and businesses in the Belgian province of Luxembourg adjacent to the independent Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, this for historical reasons.) The equivalent name of the Belgian franc in Dutch, Belgium's other official language, was Belgische Frank. As mentioned before, in Luxembourg the franc was called Frang (plural Frangen). Swiss franc and Liechtenstein franc[edit] The Swiss franc (ISO code: CHF or 756), which appreciated significantly against the new European currency from April to September 2000, remains one of the world's strongest currencies, worth today around five-sixths of a euro. The Swiss franc is used in Switzerland and in Liechtenstein. Liechtenstein retains the ability to mint its own currency, the Liechtenstein franc, which it does from time to time for commemorative or emergency purposes. The name of the country "Swiss Confederation" is found on some of the coins in Latin (Confoederatio Helvetica), as Switzerland has four official languages, all of which are used on the notes. The denomination is abbreviated "Fr." on the coins which is the abbreviation in all four languages. Saar franc[edit] The Saar franc, linked at par to the French franc, was introduced in the Saar Protectorate in 1948. On 1 January 1957, the territory joined the Federal Republic of Germany, nevertheless, in its new member state of Saarland, the Saar franc continued to be the currency until 6 July 1959. The name of the Saar franc in German, the main official language in the Protectorate, was Franken. Coins displaying German inscriptions and the coat of arms of the Protectorate were circulated and used together with French francs. As banknotes, only French franc bills existed. Countries that use a franc[edit] Countries currently using a franc[edit] Current[edit] Countries Currency ISO 4217 code  Benin West African CFA franc XOF  Burkina Faso West African CFA franc XOF  Burundi Burundian franc BIF  Cameroon Central African CFA franc XAF  Central African Republic Central African CFA franc XAF  Chad Central African CFA franc XAF  Republic of the Congo Central African CFA franc XAF  Democratic Republic of the Congo Congolese franc CDF  Comoros Comorian franc KMF  Côte d'Ivoire West African CFA franc XOF  Djibouti Djiboutian franc DJF  Equatorial Guinea Central African CFA franc XAF  Gabon Central African CFA franc XAF  Guinea Guinean franc GNF  Guinea-Bissau West African CFA franc XOF  Liechtenstein Swiss franc CHF  Mali West African CFA franc XOF  Niger West African CFA franc XOF  Rwanda Rwandan franc RWF  Senegal West African CFA franc XOF   Switzerland Swiss franc CHF  Togo West African CFA franc XOF Collectivities franc[edit] Countries Currency ISO 4217 code French Polynesia CFP franc XPF New Caledonia XPF Wallis and Futuna XPF Defunct[edit] Countries Former currency Current currency Since  Algeria Algerian franc Algerian dinar 1964  Andorra French franc and Spanish peseta euro 2002  Belgium Belgian franc  France (Overseas collectivities) French franc  Luxembourg Luxembourgish franc  Madagascar Malagasy franc Malagasy ariary 2005  Mauritania CFA franc Mauritanian ouguiya 1973  Monaco French franc euro 2002  Morocco Moroccan franc Moroccan dirham 1960  Saar Saar franc (used from 1947 -1959) Deutsche Mark 1959  Tunisia Tunisian franc Tunisian dinar 1958 See also[edit] Money portal Numismatics portal Cape Verdean escudo Latin Monetary Union The Latverian franc is the currency of the fictional country of Latveria. Special settlement currencies UIC franc Gold franc Livre tournois (French pound) Roman currency New Hebrides franc Westphalian frank Reunion franc References[edit] ^ L. Ciani, Les Monnaies Royales Françaises (1926) p.77 and p.92 ^ L. Ciani, Les Monnaies Royales Françaises (1926) p.314 and p.356 ^ https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/rfd/1954/235/rfd235.pdf ^ "West Africa renames CFA franc but keeps it pegged to euro". Reuters. Retrieved 22 December 2019. External links[edit] Media related to Franc at Wikimedia Commons Swiss Franc Tracker - CHF v t e Currencies named franc or similar Circulating Burundian franc CFA franc BEAC BCEAO CFP franc New Caledonian franc French Polynesian franc Comorian franc (فرنك‎) Congolese franc Djiboutian franc (فرنك‎) Guinean franc Liechtenstein franc (Franken) Rwandan franc (frank) Swiss franc (Franken, franco) Obsolete Aargau frank Albanian Franga Algerian franc Appenzell frank Basel frank Belgian franc (frank) Berne frank Cambodian franc Dominican franco French franc French Camerounian franc French Equatorial African franc French Guianan franc French West African franc Fribourg Frank Geneva franc Glarus frank Graubünden frank Guadeloupe franc Katangese franc Korçë frange Luccan franco Luxembourgish franc (Frang, Frank) Luzern frank Malagasy franc Malian franc Martinique franc Monégasque franc Moroccan franc (فرنك‎) New Hebrides franc Réunion franc Ruanda-Urundi franc Saar franc (Franken) St. Gallen frank Saint Pierre and Miquelon franc Schaffhausen frank Schwyz frank Solothurn frank Thurgau frank Ticino franco Togolese franc Tunisian franc (فرنك‎) Unterwalden frank Uri frank US occupation franc (unofficial) Vaud franc Vlorë frank Westphalian frank Zürich frank Private UIC franc See also Gold franc Franc Poincaré Ural franc Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franc&oldid=1005496545" Categories: Franc Currencies of Europe Denominations (currency) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Kinyarwanda-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Luxembourgish-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Føroyskt Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Português Русский Саха тыла Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 7 February 2021, at 23:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
