British English - Wikipedia British English From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search "British variant" redirects here. For the variant of SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) first found in the United Kingdom, see Variant of Concern 202012/01. Forms of the English language used in the United Kingdom British English English Native to United Kingdom Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English British English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Standard forms Received Pronunciation Standard Scottish English Standard Hiberno-English Writing system Latin (English alphabet) Official status Official language in United Kingdom (originally England) Language codes ISO 639-3 – IETF en-GB[1][2] Comparison of American and British English American English British English Keyboards Grammar Speech Standard accents Word pronunciations Spelling Vocabulary Glossary of American terms not widely used in the United Kingdom Glossary of British terms not widely used in the United States List of garments having different names in American and British English Lists of words having different meanings in American and British English: (A–L M–Z) Works Works with different titles in the UK and US v t e Canadian spelling in comparison with American and British spelling. British English (BrE) is the standard dialect of the English language as spoken and written in the United Kingdom.[5] Variations exist in formal, written English in the United Kingdom. For example, the adjective wee is almost exclusively used in parts of Scotland, North East England, Ireland, and occasionally Yorkshire, whereas little is predominant elsewhere. Nevertheless, there is a meaningful degree of uniformity in written English within the United Kingdom, and this could be described by the term British English. The forms of spoken English, however, vary considerably more than in most other areas of the world where English is spoken,[6] so a uniform concept of British English is more difficult to apply to the spoken language. According to Tom McArthur in the Oxford Guide to World English, British English shares "all the ambiguities and tensions in the word 'British' and as a result can be used and interpreted in two ways, more broadly or more narrowly, within a range of blurring and ambiguity".[7] Colloquial portmanteau words for British English include: Bringlish (recorded from 1967), Britglish (1973), Britlish (1976), Brenglish (1993) and Brilish (2011).[8] Contents 1 History 2 Dialects 2.1 Regional 2.2 Ethnicity 3 Features 3.1 T-stopping 3.2 R-dropping 3.3 Diphthongisation 3.3.1 North 3.3.2 South 3.4 People in groups 3.5 Negatives 4 Standardisation 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links History[edit] Main article: History of the English language English is a West Germanic language that originated from the Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Britain by Germanic settlers from various parts of what is now northwest Germany and the northern Netherlands. The resident population at this time was generally speaking Common Brittonic—the insular variety of continental Celtic, which was influenced by the Roman occupation. This group of languages (Welsh, Cornish, Cumbric) cohabited alongside English into the modern period, but due to their remoteness from the Germanic languages, influence on English was notably limited. However, the degree of influence remains debated, and it has recently been argued that its grammatical influence accounts for the substantial innovations noted between English and the other West Germanic languages.[9] Initially, Old English was a diverse group of dialects, reflecting the varied origins of the Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms of England. One of these dialects, Late West Saxon, eventually came to dominate. The original Old English language was then influenced by two waves of invasion: the first was by speakers of the Scandinavian branch of the Germanic family, who settled in parts of Britain in the 8th and 9th centuries; the second was the Normans in the 11th century, who spoke Old Norman and ultimately developed an English variety of this called Anglo-Norman. These two invasions caused English to become "mixed" to some degree (though it was never a truly mixed language in the strictest sense of the word; mixed languages arise from the cohabitation of speakers of different languages, who develop a hybrid tongue for basic communication). The more idiomatic, concrete and descriptive English is, the more it is from Anglo-Saxon origins. The more intellectual and abstract English is, the more it contains Latin and French influences e.g. swine (like the Germanic schwein) is the animal in the field bred by the occupied Anglo-Saxons and pork (like the French porc) is the animal at the table eaten by the occupying Normans.[10] Cohabitation with the Scandinavians resulted in a significant grammatical simplification and lexical enrichment of the Anglo-Frisian core of English; the later Norman occupation led to the grafting onto that Germanic core of a more elaborate layer of words from the Romance branch of the European languages. This Norman influence entered English largely through the courts and government. Thus, English developed into a "borrowing" language of great flexibility and with a huge vocabulary. Dialects[edit] See also: Manx English and Channel Island English This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. Dialects and accents vary amongst the four countries of the United Kingdom, as well as within the countries themselves. The major divisions are normally classified as English English (or English as spoken in England, which encompasses Southern English dialects, West Country dialects, East and West Midlands English dialects and Northern English dialects), Ulster English in Northern Ireland, Welsh English (not to be confused with the Welsh language), and Scottish English (not to be confused with the Scots language or Scottish Gaelic language). The various British dialects also differ in the words that they have borrowed from other languages. Around the middle of the 15th century, there were points where within the 5 major dialects there were almost 500 ways to spell the word though.[11] Following its last major survey of English Dialects (1949–1950), the University of Leeds has started work on a new project. In May 2007 the Arts and Humanities Research Council awarded a grant to Leeds to study British regional dialects.[12][13] The team are[a] sifting through a large collection of examples of regional slang words and phrases turned up by the "Voices project" run by the BBC, in which they invited the public to send in examples of English still spoken throughout the country. The BBC Voices project also collected hundreds of news articles about how the British speak English from swearing through to items on language schools. This information will also be collated and analysed by Johnson's team both for content and for where it was reported. "Perhaps the most remarkable finding in the Voices study is that the English language is as diverse as ever, despite our increased mobility and constant exposure to other accents and dialects through TV and radio".[13] When discussing the award of the grant in 2007, Leeds University stated: that they were "very pleased"—and indeed, "well chuffed"—at receiving their generous grant. He could, of course, have been "bostin" if he had come from the Black Country, or if he was a Scouser he would have been well "made up" over so many spondoolicks, because as a Geordie might say, £460,000 is a "canny load of chink".[14] Regional[edit] Most people in Britain speak with a regional accent or dialect. However, about 2% of Britons speak with an accent called Received Pronunciation[15] (also called "the Queen's English", "Oxford English" and "BBC English"[16]), that is essentially region-less.[17][18] It derives from a mixture of the Midlands and Southern dialects spoken in London in the early modern period.[18] It is frequently used as a model for teaching English to foreign learners.[18] In the South East there are significantly different accents; the Cockney accent spoken by some East Londoners is strikingly different from Received Pronunciation (RP). The Cockney rhyming slang can be (and was initially intended to be) difficult for outsiders to understand,[19] although the extent of its use is often somewhat exaggerated. Estuary English has been gaining prominence in recent decades: it has some features of RP and some of Cockney. In London itself, the broad local accent is still changing, partly influenced by Caribbean speech. Immigrants to the UK in recent decades have brought many more languages to the country. Surveys started in 1979 by the Inner London Education Authority discovered over 100 languages being spoken domestically by the families of the inner city's schoolchildren. As a result, Londoners speak with a mixture of accents, depending on ethnicity, neighbourhood, class, age, upbringing, and sundry other factors.[citation needed] Since the mass internal migration to Northamptonshire in the 1940s and its position between several major accent regions, it has become a source of various accent developments. In Northampton the older accent has been influenced by overspill Londoners. There is an accent known locally as the Kettering accent, which is a transitional accent between the East Midlands and East Anglian. It is the last southern Midlands accent to use the broad "a" in words like bath/grass (i.e. barth/grarss). Conversely crass/plastic use a slender "a". A few miles northwest in Leicestershire the slender "a" becomes more widespread generally. In the town of Corby, five miles (8 km) north, one can find Corbyite, which unlike the Kettering accent, is largely influenced by the West Scottish accent. In addition, many British people can to some degree temporarily "swing" their accent towards a more neutral form of English at will, to reduce difficulty where very different accents are involved, or when speaking to foreigners.[citation needed] Ethnicity[edit] Main article: Multicultural London English This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (July 2018) Features[edit] Phonological features characteristic of British English revolve around the pronunciation of the letter R, as well as the dental plosive T and some diphthongs specific to this dialect. T-stopping[edit] Once regarded as a Cockney feature, a number of forms of spoken British English, /t/ has became commonly realised as a glottal stop [ʔ] when it is in the intervocalic position, in a process called T-glottalisation. National media being based in London has seen a glottal-stop spreading wider than it once was in word final, not being heard a no[ʔ]. It is still stigmatised when used at the beginning and central positions, such as later, often has all but regained /t/ .[20] Other consonants subject to this usage in Cockney English are p, as in pa[ʔ]er and k as in ba[ʔ]er.[20] R-dropping[edit] In most areas of England, outside the West Country and near other countries of the UK, the consonant R is not pronounced if not followed by a vowel, lengthening the preceding vowel instead. This phenomenon is known as non-rhoticity.[example needed] In these same areas, a tendency exists to insert an R between a word ending in a vowel and a next word beginning with a vowel. This is called the intrusive R. It could be understood as a merger, in that words that once ended in an R and words that did not are no longer treated differently. This is also due to London-centric influences.[example needed] Diphthongisation[edit] British dialects differ on the extent of diphthongisation of long vowels, with southern varieties extensively turning them into diphthongs, and with northern dialects normally preserving many of them. As a comparison, North American varieties could be said to be in-between. North[edit] Long vowels /iː/ and /uː/ are usually preserved, and in several areas also /oː/ and /eː/, as in go and say (unlike other varieties of English, that change them to [oʊ] and [eɪ] respectively). Some areas go as far as not diphthongising medieval /iː/ and /uː/, that give rise to modern /aɪ/ and /aʊ/; that is, for example, in the traditional accent of Newcastle upon Tyne, 'out' will sound as 'oot', and in parts of Scotland and North-West England, 'my' will be pronounced as 'me'. South[edit] Long vowels /iː/ and /uː/ are diphthongised to [ɪi] and [ʊu] respectively (or, more technically, [ʏʉ], with a raised tongue), so that ee and oo in feed and food are pronounced with a movement. The diphthong [oʊ] is also pronounced with a greater movement, normally [əʊ], [əʉ] or [əɨ]. People in groups[edit] Dropping a morphological grammatical number, in collective nouns, is stronger in British English than North American English.[21] This is to treat them as plural when once grammatically singular, a perceived natural number prevails, especially when applying to institutional nouns and groups of people. The noun 'police', for example, undergoes this treatment: Police are investigating the theft of work tools worth £500 from a van at the Sprucefield park and ride car park in Lisburn.[22] A football team can be treated likewise: Arsenal have lost just one of 20 home Premier League matches against Manchester City.[23] This tendency can be observed in texts produced already in the 19th century. For example, Jane Austen, a British author, writes in Chapter 4 of Pride and Prejudice, published in 1813: All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes.[24] However, in Chapter 16, the grammatical number is used. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence. Negatives[edit] Some dialects of British English use negative concords, also known as double negatives. Rather than changing a word or using a positive, words like nobody, not, nothing, and never would be used in the same sentence.[25] While this does not occur in Standard English, it does occur in non-standard dialects. The double negation follows the idea of two different morphemes, one that causes the double negation, and one that is used for the point or the verb.[26] Standardisation[edit] As with English around the world, the English language as used in the United Kingdom is governed by convention rather than formal code: there is no body equivalent to the Académie Française or the Real Academia Española. Dictionaries (for example, Oxford English Dictionary, Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, Chambers Dictionary, Collins Dictionary) record usage rather than attempting to prescribe it.[27] In addition, vocabulary and usage change with time: words are freely borrowed from other languages and other strains of English, and neologisms are frequent. For historical reasons dating back to the rise of London in the 9th century, the form of language spoken in London and the East Midlands became standard English within the Court, and ultimately became the basis for generally accepted use in the law, government, literature and education in Britain. The standardisation of British English is thought to be from both dialect levelling and a thought of social superiority. Speaking in the Standard dialect created class distinctions; those who did not speak the standard English would be considered of a lesser class or social status and often discounted or considered of a low intelligence.[27] Another contribution to the standardisation of British English was the introduction of the printing press to England in the mid-15th century. In doing so, William Caxton enabled a common language and spelling to be dispersed among the entirety of England at a much faster rate.[11] Samuel Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) was a large step in the English-language spelling reform, where the purification of language focused on standardising both speech and spelling.[28] By the early 20th century, British authors had produced numerous books intended as guides to English grammar and usage, a few of which achieved sufficient acclaim to have remained in print for long periods and to have been reissued in new editions after some decades. These include, most notably of all, Fowler's Modern English Usage and The Complete Plain Words by Sir Ernest Gowers.[29] Detailed guidance on many aspects of writing British English for publication is included in style guides issued by various publishers including The Times newspaper, the Oxford University Press and the Cambridge University Press. The Oxford University Press guidelines were originally drafted as a single broadsheet page by Horace Henry Hart, and were at the time (1893) the first guide of their type in English; they were gradually expanded and eventually published, first as Hart's Rules, and in 2002 as part of The Oxford Manual of Style. Comparable in authority and stature to The Chicago Manual of Style for published American English, the Oxford Manual is a fairly exhaustive standard for published British English that writers can turn to in the absence of specific guidance from their publishing house.[30] See also[edit] American English Australian English British Sign Language Canadian English Commonwealth English Hiberno-English New Zealand English American and British English spelling differences Notes[edit] ^ In British English collective nouns may be either singular or plural, according to context. An example provided by Partridge is: " 'The committee of public safety is to consider the matter', but 'the committee of public safety quarrel regarding their next chairman' ...Thus...singular when...a unit is intended; plural when the idea of plurality is predominant". BBC television news and The Guardian style guide follow Partridge but other sources, such as BBC Online and The Times style guides, recommend a strict noun-verb agreement with the collective noun always governing the verb conjugated in the singular. BBC radio news, however, insists on the plural verb. Partridge, Eric (1947) Usage and Abusage: "Collective Nouns". Allen, John (2003) BBC News style guide, page 31. Citations ^ "English"; IANA language subtag registry; retrieved: 11 January 2019; named as: en; publication date: 16 October 2005. ^ "United Kingdom"; IANA language subtag registry; retrieved: 11 January 2019; named as: GB; publication date: 16 October 2005. ^ "British English; Hiberno-English". Oxford English Dictionary (2 ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 1989. ^ British English, Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary ^ The Oxford English Dictionary applies the term to English as "spoken or written in the British Isles; esp[ecially] the forms of English usual in Great Britain", reserving "Hiberno-English" for the "English language as spoken and written in Ireland".[3] Others, such as the Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary, define it as the "English language as it is spoken and written in England".[4] ^ Jeffries, Stuart (27 March 2009). "The G2 Guide to Regional English". The Guardian. section G2, p. 12. ^ McArthur (2002), p. 45. ^ Lambert, James. 2018. A multitude of 'lishes': The nomenclature of hybridity. English World-wide, 39(1): 22-23. doi:10.1075/eww.38.3.04lam ^ English and Welsh, 1955 J. R. R. Tolkien, also see references in Brittonicisms in English ^ "Linguistics 201: History of English". pandora.cii.wwu.edu. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. ^ a b "The History of English - Early Modern English (c. 1500 - c. 1800)". www.thehistoryofenglish.com. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2017. ^ Professor Sally Johnson biography on the Leeds University website ^ a b Mapping the English language—from cockney to Orkney, Leeds University website, 25 May 2007. ^ McSmith, Andy. Dialect researchers given a "canny load of chink" to sort "pikeys" from "chavs" in regional accents, The Independent, 1 June 2007. Page 20 ^ "Received Pronunciation". Retrieved 20 March 2017. ^ BBC English because this was originally the form of English used on radio and television, although a wider variety of accents can be heard these days. ^ Sweet, Henry (1908). The Sounds of English. Clarendon Press. p. 7. ^ a b c Fowler, H.W. (1996). R.W. Birchfield (ed.). "Fowler's Modern English Usage". Oxford University Press. ^ Franklyn, Julian (1975). A dictionary of rhyming slang. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. p. 9. ISBN 0-415-04602-5. ^ a b Trudgill, Peter (1984). Language in the British Isles. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–57. ISBN 0-521-28409-0. ^ [1], Oxford Dictionaries website, 2 April 2017. ^ [2], BBC, 8 January 2017. ^ [3], BBC, 2 April 2017. ^ "Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen". www.gutenberg.org. Retrieved 27 February 2020. ^ "Double negatives and usage - English Grammar Today - Cambridge Dictionary". dictionary.cambridge.org. ^ Tubau, Susagna (2016). "Lexical variation and Negative Concord in Traditional Dialects of British English". The Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics. 19 (2): 143–177. doi:10.1007/s10828-016-9079-4. ^ a b "The Standardisation of English". courses.nus.edu.sg. ^ "The History of English: Spelling and Standardization (Suzanne Kemmer)". www.ruf.rice.edu. ^ "New edition of The Complete Plain Words will delight fans of no-frills". 27 March 2014. ^ "Style Guide" (PDF). University of Oxford. Retrieved 14 June 2019. References[edit] McArthur, Tom (2002). Oxford Guide to World English. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-866248-3 hardback, ISBN 0-19-860771-7 paperback. Bragg, Melvyn (2004). The Adventure of English, London: Sceptre. ISBN 0-340-82993-1 Peters, Pam (2004). The Cambridge Guide to English Usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-62181-X. Simpson, John (ed.) (1989). Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. External links[edit] Sounds Familiar? – Examples of regional accents and dialects across the UK on the British Library's 'Sounds Familiar' website Accents and dialects from the British Library Sound Archive Accents of English from Around the World Hear and compare how the same 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world – instantaneous playback online The Septic's Companion: A British Slang Dictionary – an online dictionary of British slang, viewable alphabetically or by category British English Turkey v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe Great Britain England North Cheshire Cumbria Barrow Lancashire Liverpool Manchester Northumbria Pitmatic Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire Midlands East Midlands West Midlands Birmingham Black Country Stoke-on-Trent South Cockney East Anglia Norfolk Suffolk Multicultural London Received Pronunciation Surrey Sussex Thames Estuary West Country Cornwall Dorset Scotland Glasgow Highlands Wales Abercraf Cardiff Gower Port Talbot Ireland Dublin South-West Ulster Channel Islands European Union Gibraltar Isle of Man Americas North America Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Lunenburg Newfoundland Quebec Standard Central and Western Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest United States Mid-Atlantic Baltimore Philadelphia Midland New England Boston Eastern Maine Western New York City accent North Inland North North-Central Upper Peninsula South Appalachia High Tider New Orleans Older Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Ethno-cultural African-American Vernacular American Indian Cajun Chicano General American Miami Latino New York Latino Pennsylvania Dutch Yeshiva Caribbean The Bahamas Barbados Cayman Islands Bay Islands Jamaica Puerto Rico Samaná, Dominican Republic Trinidad and Tobago Bermuda Falkland Islands Oceania Australia Aboriginal Accent broad, general and cultivated South Australia Torres Strait Western Australia Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Africa Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa accent Cape Flats South Atlantic Uganda Zimbabwe Asia Bangladesh Brunei Hong Kong India regional and occupational Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Related English language Anglish Basic Comparison of American and British English E-Prime Engrish English as a lingua franca English-based creole languages Globish International Mid-Atlantic Non-native pronunciations of English Pidgin Plain Special Standard v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. United Kingdom portal Language portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_English&oldid=1006752355" Categories: British English Dialects of English English language Languages of Gibraltar Languages of the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with redirect hatnotes needing review Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from December 2016 Use dmy dates from March 2020 Language articles with IETF language tag Language articles without speaker estimate Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Language articles missing Glottolog code All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Articles to be expanded from July 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from July 2018 All articles with empty sections Articles using small message boxes All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from March 2020 AC with 0 elements Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Català Corsu Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 14 February 2021, at 16:34 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
