Application software - Wikipedia Application software From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search LibreOffice Writer, a word processing application. Application software (app for short) is a program or group of programs designed for end-users. Examples of an application include a word processor, a spreadsheet, an accounting application, a web browser, an email client, a media player, a file viewer, simulators, a console game, or a photo editor. The collective noun application software refers to all applications collectively.[1] This contrasts with system software, which is mainly involved with running the computer. Applications may be bundled with the computer and its system software or published separately and may be coded as proprietary, open-source, or projects.[2] Apps built for mobile platforms are called mobile apps. Contents 1 Terminology 1.1 Metonymy 1.2 Apps and killer apps 2 Classification 2.1 By property and use rights 2.2 By coding language 2.3 By purpose and output 2.4 Information worker software 2.5 Entertainment software 2.6 Educational software 2.7 Enterprise infrastructure software 2.8 Simulation software 2.9 Media development software 2.10 Product engineering software 2.11 Software engineering 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Terminology[edit] In information technology, an application (app), application program or application software is a computer program designed to help people perform an activity. Depending on the activity for which it was designed, an application can manipulate text, numbers, audio, graphics, and a combination of these elements. Some application packages focus on a single task, such as word processing; others, called integrated software include several applications.[3] User-written software tailors systems to meet the user's specific needs. User-written software includes spreadsheet templates, word processor macros, scientific simulations, audio, graphics, and animation scripts. Even email filters are a kind of user software. Users create this software themselves and often overlook how important it is. The delineation between system software such as operating systems and application software is not exact, however, and is occasionally the object of controversy.[4] For example, one of the key questions in the United States v. Microsoft Corp. antitrust trial was whether Microsoft's Internet Explorer web browser was part of its Windows operating system or a separable piece of application software. As another example, the GNU/Linux naming controversy is, in part, due to disagreement about the relationship between the Linux kernel and the operating systems built over this kernel. In some types of embedded systems, the application software and the operating system software may be indistinguishable to the user, as in the case of software used to control a VCR, DVD player, or microwave oven. The above definitions may exclude some applications that may exist on some computers in large organizations. For an alternative definition of an app: see Application Portfolio Management. Metonymy[edit] The word "application" used as an adjective is not restricted to the "of or pertaining to application software" meaning.[5] For example, concepts such as application programming interface (API), application server, application virtualization, application lifecycle management and portable application apply to all computer programs alike, not just application software. Apps and killer apps[edit] Main article: Killer application Some applications are available in versions for several different platforms; others only work on one and are thus called, for example, a geography application for Microsoft Windows, or an Android application for education, or a Linux game. Sometimes a new and popular application arises which only runs on one platform, increasing the desirability of that platform. This is called a killer application or killer app. For example, VisiCalc was the first modern spreadsheet software for the Apple II and helped selling the then-new personal computers into offices. For Blackberry it was their email software. In recent years, the shortened term "app" (coined in 1981 or earlier[6]) has become popular to refer to applications for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets, the shortened form matching their typically smaller scope compared to applications on PCs. Even more recently, the shortened version is used for desktop application software as well. Classification[edit] There are many different and alternative ways in order to classify application software. By the legal point of view, application software is mainly classified with a black box approach, in relation to the rights of its final end-users or subscribers (with eventual intermediate and tiered subscription levels). Software applications are also classified in respect of the programming language in which the source code is written or executed, and respect of their purpose and outputs. By property and use rights[edit] Application software is usually distinguished among two main classes: closed source vs open source software applications, and among free or proprietary software applications. Proprietary software is placed under the exclusive copyright, and a software license grants limited usage rights. The open-closed principle states that software may be "open only for extension, but not for modification". Such applications can only get add-on by third-parties. Free and open-source software shall be run, distributed, sold or extended for any purpose, and -being open- shall be modified or reversed in the same way. FOSS software applications released under a free license may be perpetual and also royalty-free. Perhaps, the owner, the holder or third-party enforcer of any right (copyright, trademark, patent, or ius in re aliena) are entitled to add exceptions, limitations, time decays or expiring dates to the license terms of use. Public-domain software is a type of FOSS, which is royalty-free and - openly or reservedly- can be run, distributed, modified, reversed, republished or created in derivative works without any copyright attribution and therefore revocation. It can even be sold, but without transferring the public domain property to other single subjects. Public-domain SW can be released under an (un)licensing legal statement, which enforces those terms and conditions for an indefinite duration (for a lifetime, or forever). By coding language[edit] Since the development and near-universal adoption of the web, an important distinction that has emerged, has been between web applications — written with HTML, JavaScript and other web-native technologies and typically requiring one to be online and running a web browser — and the more traditional native applications written in whatever languages are available for one's particular type of computer. There has been a contentious debate in the computing community regarding web applications replacing native applications for many purposes, especially on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets. Web apps have indeed greatly increased in popularity for some uses, but the advantages of applications make them unlikely to disappear soon, if ever. Furthermore, the two can be complementary, and even integrated.[7][8][9] By purpose and output[edit] Application software can also be seen as being either horizontal or vertical.[10][11] Horizontal applications are more popular and widespread, because they are general purpose, for example word processors or databases. Vertical applications are niche products, designed for a particular type of industry or business, or department within an organization. Integrated suites of software will try to handle every specific aspect possible of, for example, manufacturing or banking worker, or accounting, or customer service. There are many types of application software:[12] LibreOffice Writer, an open-source word processor that is a component of LibreOffice (running on Linux Mint) An application suite consists of multiple applications bundled together. They usually have related functions, features and user interfaces, and may be able to interact with each other, e.g. open each other's files. Business applications often come in suites, e.g. Microsoft Office, LibreOffice and iWork, which bundle together a word processor, a spreadsheet, etc.; but suites exist for other purposes, e.g. graphics or music. Enterprise software addresses the needs of an entire organization's processes and data flows, across several departments, often in a large distributed environment. Examples include enterprise resource planning systems, customer relationship management (CRM) systems and supply chain management software. Departmental Software is a sub-type of enterprise software with a focus on smaller organizations or groups within a large organization. (Examples include travel expense management and IT Helpdesk.) Enterprise infrastructure software provides common capabilities needed to support enterprise software systems. (Examples include databases, email servers, and systems for managing networks and security.) Application platform as a service (aPaaS) is a cloud computing service that offers development and deployment environments for application services. Information worker software lets users create and manage information, often for individual projects within a department, in contrast to enterprise management. Examples include time management, resource management, analytical, collaborative and documentation tools. Word processors, spreadsheets, email and blog clients, personal information system, and individual media editors may aid in multiple information worker tasks. Content access software is used primarily to access content without editing, but may include software that allows for content editing. Such software addresses the needs of individuals and groups to consume digital entertainment and published digital content. (Examples include media players, web browsers, and help browsers.) Educational software is related to content access software, but has the content or features adapted for use in by educators or students. For example, it may deliver evaluations (tests), track progress through material, or include collaborative capabilities. Simulation software simulates physical or abstract systems for either research, training or entertainment purposes. Media development software generates print and electronic media for others to consume, most often in a commercial or educational setting. This includes graphic-art software, desktop publishing software, multimedia development software, HTML editors, digital-animation editors, digital audio and video composition, and many others.[13] Product engineering software is used in developing hardware and software products. This includes computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided engineering (CAE), computer language editing and compiling tools, integrated development environments, and application programmer interfaces. Entertainment Software can refer to video games, screen savers, programs to display motion pictures or play recorded music, and other forms of entertainment which can be experienced through use of a computing device. Applications can also be classified by computing platform such as a particular operating system, delivery network such as in cloud computing and Web 2.0 applications, or delivery devices such as mobile apps for mobile devices. The operating system itself can be considered application software when performing simple calculating, measuring, rendering, and word processing tasks not used to control hardware via command-line interface or graphical user interface. This does not include application software bundled within operating systems such as a software calculator or text editor. Information worker software[edit] Accounting software Data management Contact manager Spreadsheet Database software Documentation Document automation Word processor Desktop publishing software Diagramming software Presentation software Email Blog software Enterprise resource planning Financial software Day trading software Banking software Clearing systems Arithmetic software Field service management Workforce management software Project management software Calendaring software Employee scheduling software Workflow software Reservation systems Entertainment software[edit] Screen savers Video games Arcade games Console games Mobile games Personal computer games Software art Demo 64K intro Educational software[edit] Main article: List of educational software Classroom management Reference software Sales readiness software Survey management Encyclopedia software Enterprise infrastructure software[edit] Business workflow software Database management system (DBMS) Digital asset management (DAM) software Document management software Geographic information system (GIS) Simulation software[edit] Computer simulators Scientific simulators Social simulators Battlefield simulators Emergency simulators Vehicle simulators Flight simulators Driving simulators Simulation games Vehicle simulation games Media development software[edit] 3D computer graphics software Animation software Graphic art software Raster graphics editor Vector graphics editor Image organizer Video editing software Audio editing software Digital audio workstation Music sequencer Scorewriter HTML editor Game development tool Product engineering software[edit] Hardware engineering Computer-aided engineering Computer-aided design (CAD) Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) Finite element analysis Software engineering[edit] Compiler software Integrated development environment Compiler Linker Debugger Version control Game development tool License manager See also[edit] Software development Mobile app Web application References[edit] ^ "Application software". PC Magazine. Ziff Davis. ^ Ryan, Thorne (2013-03-14). "Caffeine and computer screens: student programmers endure weekend long appathon". The Arbiter. Archived from the original on 2016-07-09. Retrieved 2015-10-12. ^ Ceruzzi, Paul E. (2000). A History of Modern Computing. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-03255-4. ^ Ulrich, William. "Application Package Software: The Promise Vs. Reality". Cutter Consortium. ^ Application Package Software: The Promise Vs. Reality ^ The History of 'App' and the Demise of the Programmer ^ Gassée, Jean-Louis (2012-09-17). "The Silly Web vs. Native Apps Debate". The Silly Web vs. Native Apps Debate. Archived from the original on 2016-04-15. Retrieved 2013-07-14. ^ Frechette, Casey (2013-04-11). "What journalists need to know about the difference between Web apps and native apps". Poynter. Retrieved 2017-01-04. ^ Valums, Andrew (2010-02-10). "Web apps vs desktop apps". valums.com. Archived from the original on 2013-04-02. Retrieved 2013-07-14. ^ "What Is a Horizontal Application?". ^ "What Are Horizontal Services?". Archived from the original on 2013-10-31. ^ "What is Application Software & Its Types | eduCBA". eduCBA. 2015-12-21. Retrieved 2017-03-24. ^ Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William (1996). Computer: A History of the Information Machine. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-02990-6. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application software. Learning materials related to Application software at Wikiversity Authority control GND: 4120906-0 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Application_software&oldid=1006210047" Categories: Application software Hidden categories: Commons link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Олык марий پنجابی Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 11 February 2021, at 17:17 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
