Ubuntu philosophy - Wikipedia Ubuntu philosophy From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about a philosophical concept. For other uses, see Ubuntu (disambiguation). Southern African philosophy This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) ‹ The template below (Expert needed) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › This article needs attention from an expert in Linguistics. The specific problem is: need help on language table. WikiProject Linguistics may be able to help recruit an expert. (January 2021) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Non-English content should be put into {{lang}}. Please help improve this article if you can. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ubuntu (Zulu pronunciation: [ùɓúntʼù])[1] is a Nguni Bantu term meaning "humanity". It is often translated as "I am because we are", or "humanity towards others", or in Zulu "umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu" or in Xhosa, "umntu ngumntu ngabantu" but is often used in a more philosophical sense to mean "the belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity".[2] This over 2000-year-old philosophy, is found in every country of Africa south of the Sahara, using different cognate terms in the local Bantu language. The term "bantu" itself is related to "ubuntu".[3] Contents 1 Origin 2 Different names in different countries and languages 3 Definitions 4 Ubuntu maxims or short statements 5 History of the concept in African written sources 6 By country 6.1 Zimbabwe 6.2 South Africa 6.3 Malawi 7 "Ubuntu diplomacy" 8 Ubuntu education philosophy 9 Ubuntu social work, welfare and development 10 Ubuntu research philosophy 11 Ubuntu moral philosophy or ubuntu morality 12 Ubuntu political and leadership philosophy 13 Ubuntu social justice, criminal justice and jurisprudence 14 In popular culture 15 See also 16 Footnotes 17 References 18 Further reading 19 External links Origin[edit] Over 2000 years ago, the people[vague] of Africa developed a collective meaning for life to describe the kind of relationship an individual person is expected to have with their family, community, society, environment and their spiritual world. As the Africans migrated mostly from the west part of the continent to the east, central and south, and beyond the continent, they carried with them this meaning to life. As they traveled, they developed new languages and subcultures, and in the process they came up with specific names for this collective meaning. Different names in different countries and languages[edit] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Should be reformatted into a table of language(s)-word-countries. The non-Bantu words should ideally also be put into a table with source languages identified. Please help improve this section if you can. (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Although the most popular name today is Ubuntu (Zulu language, South Africa), it has several other names. "Humanity" in Bantu languages Language Word Countries Chewa umunthu Malawi, Zambia Zulu and Xhosa ubuntu South Africa Sesotho botho South Africa Shona unhu, hunhu Zimbabwe Swahili utu Kenya, Tanzania Meru munto[a] Kenya Kikuyu umundu[a] Kenya Heroro omundu Namibia Tswana muthu Botswana Kongo gimuntu Angola Tonga vumuntu Mozambique In Angola, it is known as gimuntu, Botswana (muthu), Burundi (ubuntu), Cameroon (bato), Congo (bantu), Congo Democratic Republic (bomoto/bantu), Kenya (utu/munto/mondo), Malawi (umunthu), Mozambique (vumuntu), Namibia (omundu), Nigeria (mutunchi), Rwanda (bantu), South Africa (ubuntu/botho), Tanzania (utu/obuntu/bumuntu), Uganda (obuntu), Zambia (umunthu/ubuntu) and Zimbabwe (Ubuntu, unhu or hunhu). It is also found in other Bantu countries not mentioned here.[3][4] The concept of "I am because we are", sometimes translated as "humanitude", also has equivalents in non-Bantu-speaking Africa: Burkina Faso (maaya), Cote d’Ivoire (maaya), Equatorial Guinea (maaya), Guinea (maaya), Gambia (maaya), Ghana (biako ye; Akan),[5] Liberia (maaya), Mali (maaya (Bambara)/de ya), Sierra Leonne (maaya),[3] Nigeria (iwa in Yoruba and agwa in Igbo).[6] In addition, it is called boroterey in the Songhay languages and nite in the Wolof language.[7] Definitions[edit] There are various definitions of ubuntu. The most recent definition was provided by the African Journal of Social Work (AJSW). The journal defined ubuntu as: A collection of values and practices that Black people of Africa or of African origin view as making people authentic human beings. While the nuances of these values and practices vary across different ethnic groups, they all point to one thing – an authentic individual human being is part of a larger and more significant relational, communal, societal, environmental and spiritual world[3] Play media Nelson Mandela in 2006 was asked to define "ubuntu" in a video used to launch Ubuntu Linux.[8] There are many different (and not always compatible) definitions of what ubuntu is (for a survey of how ubuntu is defined among South Africans see Gade 2012: "What is Ubuntu? Different Interpretations among South Africans of African Descent"[9]). Ubuntu asserts that society, not a transcendent being, gives human beings their humanity. An example is a Zulu-speaking person who when commanding to speak in Zulu would say "khuluma isintu", which means "speak the language of people". When someone behaves according to custom, a Sotho-speaking person would say "ke motho", which means "he/she is a human". The aspect of this that would be exemplified by a tale told (often, in private quarters) in Nguni "kushone abantu ababili ne Shangaan", in Sepedi "go tlhokofetje batho ba babedi le leShangane", in English (two people died and one Shangaan). In each of these examples, humanity comes from conforming to or being part of the tribe. According to Michael Onyebuchi Eze, the core of ubuntu can best be summarised as follows: A person is a person through other people strikes an affirmation of one’s humanity through recognition of an "other" in his or her uniqueness and difference. It is a demand for a creative intersubjective formation in which the "other" becomes a mirror (but only a mirror) for my subjectivity. This idealism suggests to us that humanity is not embedded in my person solely as an individual; my humanity is co-substantively bestowed upon the other and me. Humanity is a quality we owe to each other. We create each other and need to sustain this otherness creation. And if we belong to each other, we participate in our creations: we are because you are, and since you are, definitely I am. The "I am" is not a rigid subject, but a dynamic self-constitution dependent on this otherness creation of relation and distance.[10] An "extroverted communities" aspect is the most visible part of this ideology. There is sincere warmth with which people treat both strangers and members of the community. This overt display of warmth is not merely aesthetic but enables the formation of spontaneous communities. The resultant collaborative work within these spontaneous communities transcends the aesthetic and gives functional significance to the value of warmth. How else are you to ask for sugar from your neighbour? Warmth is not the sine qua non of community formation but guards against instrumentalist relationships. Unfortunately, sincere warmth may leave one vulnerable to those with ulterior motives.[11] "Ubuntu" as political philosophy encourages community equality, propagating the distribution of wealth. This socialisation is a vestige of agrarian peoples as a hedge against the crop failures of individuals. Socialisation presupposes a community population with which individuals empathise and concomitantly, have a vested interest in its collective prosperity. Urbanisation and the aggregation of people into an abstract and bureaucratic state undermines this empathy. African Intellectual historians like Michael Onyebuchi Eze have argued however that this idea of "collective responsibility" must not be understood as absolute in which the community's good is prior to the individual's good. On this view, ubuntu it is argued, is a communitarian philosophy that is widely differentiated from the Western notion of communitarian socialism. In fact, ubuntu induces an ideal of shared human subjectivity that promotes a community's good through an unconditional recognition and appreciation of individual uniqueness and difference.[12] Audrey Tang has suggested that Ubuntu "implies that everyone has different skills and strengths; people are not isolated, and through mutual support they can help each other to complete themselves."[13] "Redemption" relates to how people deal with errant, deviant, and dissident members of the community. The belief is that man is born formless like a lump of clay. It is up to the community, as a whole, to use the fire of experience and the wheel of social control to mould him into a pot that may contribute to society. Any imperfections should be borne by the community and the community should always seek to redeem man. An example of this is the statement by the African National Congress (in South Africa) that it does not throw out its own but rather redeems. Other scholars such as Mboti (2015) argue that the normative definition of Ubuntu, notwithstanding its intuitive appeal, is still open to doubt. The definition of Ubuntu, contends Mboti, has remained consistently and purposely fuzzy, inadequate and inconsistent. Mboti rejects the interpretation that Africans are “naturally” interdependent and harmony-seeking, and that humanity is given to a person by and through other persons. He sees a philosophical trap in attempts to elevate harmony to a moral duty – a sort of categorical imperative – that Africans must simply uphold. Mboti cautions against relying on intuitions in attempts to say what Ubuntu is or is not. He concludes that the phrase umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu references a messier, undisciplined relationship between persons, stating that "First, there is value in regarding a broken relationship as being authentically human as much as a harmonious relationship. Second, a broken relationship can be as ethically desirable as a harmonious one. For instance, freedom follows from a break from oppression. Finally, harmonious relations can be as oppressive and false as disharmonious ones. For instance, the cowboy and his horse are in a harmonious relationship."[14] Ubuntu maxims or short statements[edit] Ubuntu is often presented in short statements called maxims by Samkange (1980). Some of these are:[15] Motho ke motho ka batho. This is Sotho or Tswana language meaning a person is a person through other people. Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu. This is Zulu language for a person through other people. Munhu munhu nevanhu. This is Shona language for a person through other people. Ndiri nekuti tiri (Shona). It means I am because we are. History of the concept in African written sources[edit] Although ubuntu has been in existence in orator (oral literature), it appeared in South African written sources from as early as the mid-19th century. Reported translations covered the semantic field of "human nature, humanness, humanity; virtue, goodness, kindness". Grammatically, the word combines the root -ntʊ̀ "person, human being" with the class 14 ubu- prefix forming abstract nouns,[16] so that the term is exactly parallel in formation to the abstract noun humanity.[17] The concept was popularised in terms of a "philosophy" or "world view" (as opposed to a quality attributed to an individual) beginning in the 1950s, notably in the writings of Jordan Kush Ngubane published in the African Drum magazine. From the 1970s, the ubuntu began to be described as a specific kind of "African humanism". Based on the context of Africanisation propagated by the political thinkers in the 1960s period of decolonisation, ubuntu was used as a term for a specifically African (or Southern African) kind of humanism found in the context of the transition to majority rule in Zimbabwe and South Africa. The first publication dedicated to ubuntu as a philosophical concept appeared in 1980, Hunhuism or Ubuntuism: A Zimbabwe Indigenous Political Philosophy (hunhu being the Shona equivalent of Nguni ubuntu) by Stanlake J. W. T. Samkange. Hunhuism or Ubuntuism is presented as political ideology for the new Zimbabwe, as Southern Rhodesia attained independence from the United Kingdom. [15] The concept was used in South Africa in the 1990s as a guiding ideal for the transition from apartheid to majority rule. The term appears in the Epilogue of the Interim Constitution of South Africa (1993), "there is a need for understanding but not for vengeance, a need for reparation but not for retaliation, a need for ubuntu but not for victimisation".[18] In South Africa, it has come to be used as a contested[19] term for a kind of humanist philosophy, ethic, or ideology, also known as Ubuntuism propagated in the Africanisation (transition to majority rule) process of these countries during the 1980s and 1990s. Since the transition to democracy in South Africa with the Nelson Mandela presidency in 1994, the term has become more widely known outside of Southern Africa, notably popularised to English-language readers through the ubuntu theology of Desmond Tutu.[20] Tutu was the chairman of the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), and many have argued that ubuntu was a formative influence on the TRC. By country[edit] Zimbabwe[edit] In the Shona language, the majority spoken language in Zimbabwe, ubuntu is unhu or hunhu. In Ndebele, it is known as ubuntu. The concept of ubuntu is viewed the same in Zimbabwe as in other African cultures. The Shona phrase munhu munhu nekuda kwevanhu means a person is human through others while ndiri nekuti tiri means I am because we are. Stanlake J. W. T. Samkange (1980) highlights the three maxims of Hunhuism or Ubuntuism that shape this philosophy: The first maxim asserts that 'To be human is to affirm one's humanity by recognizing the humanity of others and, on that basis, establish respectful human relations with them.' And 'the second maxim means that if and when one is faced with a decisive choice between wealth and the preservation of the life of another human being, then one should opt for the preservation of life'. The third 'maxim' as a 'principle deeply embedded in traditional African political philosophy' says 'that the king owed his status, including all the powers associated with it, to the will of the people under him'.[15] South Africa[edit] Ubuntu: "I am what I am because of who we all are." (From a definition offered by Liberian peace activist Leymah Gbowee.) Archbishop Desmond Tutu offered a definition in a 1999 book:[21] A person with Ubuntu is open and available to others, affirming of others, does not feel threatened that others are able and good, based from a proper self-assurance that comes from knowing that he or she belongs in a greater whole and is diminished when others are humiliated or diminished, when others are tortured or oppressed. Tutu further explained Ubuntu in 2008:.[22] Nelson Mandela explained Ubuntu as follows:[23] A traveller through a country would stop at a village and he didn't have to ask for food or for water. Once he stops, the people give him food and attend him. That is one aspect of Ubuntu, but it will have various aspects. Ubuntu does not mean that people should not address themselves. The question therefore is: Are you going to do so in order to enable the community around you to be able to improve? Tim Jackson refers to Ubuntu as a philosophy that supports the changes he says are necessary to create a future that is economically and environmentally sustainable.[24] Judge Colin Lamont expanded on the definition during his ruling on the hate speech trial of Julius Malema:.[25] At Nelson Mandela's memorial, United States President Barack Obama spoke about Ubuntu, saying, There is a word in South Africa – Ubuntu – a word that captures Mandela’s greatest gift: his recognition that we are all bound together in ways that are invisible to the eye; that there is a oneness to humanity; that we achieve ourselves by sharing ourselves with others, and caring for those around us. We can never know how much of this sense was innate in him, or how much was shaped in a dark and solitary cell. But we remember the gestures, large and small – introducing his jailers as honored guests at his inauguration; taking a pitch in a Springbok uniform; turning his family’s heartbreak into a call to confront HIV/AIDS – that revealed the depth of his empathy and his understanding. He not only embodied Ubuntu, he taught millions to find that truth within themselves.[26] Malawi[edit] This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Ubuntu philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In Malawi, the same philosophy is called "uMunthu" in the local Chewa language.[27] According to the Catholic Diocese of Zomba bishop Rt. Rev. Fr. Thomas Msusa, “The African worldview is about living as one family, belonging to God”.[28] Msusa noted that in Africa “We say ‘I am because we are’, or in Chichewa kali kokha nkanyama, tili awiri ntiwanthu (when you are on your own you are as good as an animal of the wild; when there are two of you, you form a community).” The philosophy of uMunthu has been passed on through proverbs such as Mwana wa mnzako ngwako yemwe, ukachenjera manja udya naye (your neighbor's child is your own, his/her success is your success too).[28] Some notable Malawian uMunthu philosophers and intellectuals who have written about this worldview are Augustine Musopole, Gerard Chigona, Chiwoza Bandawe, Richard Tambulasi, Harvey Kwiyani and Happy Kayuni. This includes Malawian philosopher and theologist Harvey Sindima’s treatment of uMunthu as an important African philosophy is highlighted in his 1995 book ‘Africa’s Agenda: The legacy of liberalism and colonialism in the crisis of African values’.[29] In film, the English translation of the proverb lent its hand to forming the title of Madonna's documentary, I Am Because We Are about Malawian orphans. "Ubuntu diplomacy"[edit] In June 2009, in her swearing-in remarks as US Department of State Special Representative for Global Partnerships, Global Partnership Initiative, Office of the Secretary of State (served 18 June 2009 – 10 October 2010), Elizabeth Frawley Bagley discussed ubuntu in the context of American foreign policy, stating: "In understanding the responsibilities that come with our interconnectedness, we realize that we must rely on each other to lift our World from where it is now to where we want it to be in our lifetime, while casting aside our worn out preconceptions, and our outdated modes of statecraft." She then introduced the notion of "Ubuntu Diplomacy" with the following words: In 21st-century diplomacy, the Department of State will be a convener, bringing people together from across regions and sectors to work together on issues of common interest. Our work no longer depends on the least common denominator; but rather, we will seek the highest possible multiplier effect for the results we can achieve together. We will also act as a catalyst, with our Foreign Service Officers launching new projects in tandem with those NGOs, philanthropies, and corporations at the front lines of foreign affairs to discover untapped potential, inspire fresh ideas, and create new solutions. And we will act as a collaborator, leading interagency coordination here in Washington and cross-sector collaboration in the field, with our Ambassadors working closely with our non-governmental partners to plan and implement projects for maximum impact and sustainability. It takes a shared, global response to meet the shared, global challenges we face. This is the truth taught to us in an old South African principle, ubuntu, or ‘A person is a person through other persons.’ As Archbishop Desmond Tutu describes this perspective, ubuntu ‘is not, “I think therefore I am.” It says rather: “I am a human because I belong. I participate. I share.”’ In essence, I am because you are. We are truly all in this together, and we will only succeed by building mutually beneficial partnerships among civil society, the private sector, and the public sector, in order to empower the men and women executing our foreign policy to advance their work through partnerships. The truth and reconciliation council believed in the philosophy of Ubuntu because they believed that Ubuntu was going to help to reform and reconnect the already broken country of South Africa. This is Ubuntu Diplomacy: where all sectors belong as partners, where we all participate as stakeholders, and where we all succeed together, not incrementally but exponentially.[30] Ubuntu education philosophy[edit] In education, ubuntu has been used to guide and promote African education, and to decolonise it from western educational philosophies.[31] Ubuntu education uses the family, community, society, environment and spirituality as sources of knowledge but also as teaching and learning media.[3] The essence of education is family, community, societal and environmental well being.[31] Ubuntu education is about learners becoming critical about their social conditions. Interaction, participation, recognition, respect and inclusion are important aspects of ubuntu education. Methods of teaching and learning include groups and community approaches. The objectives, content, methodology and outcomes of education are shaped by ubuntu. Ubuntu social work, welfare and development[edit] This refers to Afrocentric ways of providing a social safety net to vulnerable members of society. Common elements include collectivity. The approach helps to 'validate worldview and traditions suppressed by Eurocentric cultural hegemony'.[32] It is against materialism and individualism. It looks at an individual person as holistically. The social interventions done by social workers, welfare workers and development workers should strengthen, not weaken families, communities, society, the environment and peoples's spirituality. These are the 5 pillars of ubuntu intervention: family, community. society, environment and spirituality.[3] Ubuntu research philosophy[edit] Ubuntu can guide research objectives, ethics and methodology.[33][34] Using ubuntu research approach provides researchers with an African oriented tool that decolonises research agenda and methodology.[33] The objectives of ubuntu research are to empower families, communities and society at large. In doing ubuntu research, the position of the researcher is important because it helps create research relationships. The agenda of the research belongs to the community, and true participation is highly valued. Ujamaa is valued, it means pulling together or collaboration.[35] Ubuntu moral philosophy or ubuntu morality[edit] According to this philosophy, 'actions are right roughly insofar as they are a matter of living harmoniously with others or honouring communal relationships', 'One's ultimate goal should be to become a full person, a real self or a genuine human being'. Ukama, i.e. relationships are important.[36] Among the Shona people for example, when a person dies, his or her property is shared amongst relatives and there are culturally approved ways of doing this. The practice is called kugova. Samkange (1980)'s maxim on morality says “If and when one is faced with a decisive choice between wealth and the preservation of the life of another human being, then one should opt for the preservation of life”. Ubuntu political and leadership philosophy[edit] Samkange (1980) said no foreign political philosophy can be useful in a country more than the indigenous philosophies.[15] "Is there a philosophy or ideology indigenous to (a) country that can serve its people just as well, if not better than, foreign ideologies?", asked Samkange in the book Hunhuism or Ubuntuism. His maxim for leadership is “The king owes his status, including all the powers associated with it, to the will of the people under him”.[15]:7 Ubuntu social justice, criminal justice and jurisprudence[edit] Ubuntu justice has elements different from western societies: it values repairing relationships. Ubuntu justice emphasises these elements:[36] Deterrence which can be done socially, physically, economically or spiritually Returning and Replacement - meaning bring back what has been stolen, replacing it or compensating. In Shona language this is called kudzora and kuripa Apology, Forgiveness and Reconciliation (restoration of ukama or relations) after meeting the above Warnings and Punishments (retribution) from leaders and elders if the above have not been achieved or ignored Warnings and Punishments from spiritual beings if the above have not been met. In Shona culture, these are called jambwa and ngozi Families, and at times community are involved in the process of justice. In popular culture[edit] Ubuntu was a major theme in John Boorman's 2004 film In My Country.[37] Former US president Bill Clinton used the term at the 2006 Labour Party conference in the UK to explain why society is important.[38] The Boston Celtics, the 2008 NBA champions, have chanted "ubuntu" when breaking a huddle since the start of the 2007–2008 season.[39] At the 2002 UN World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), there was an Ubuntu Village exposition centre.[40] Ubuntu was the theme of the 76th General Convention of the American Episcopal Church.[41] The logo includes the text "I in You and You in Me". In October 2004 Mark Shuttleworth, a South African entrepreneur and owner of UK based company Canonical Ltd., founded the Ubuntu Foundation that is the company behind the creation of a computer operating system based on Debian Linux. He named the Linux distribution Ubuntu.[2] In film, the English translation of the proverb lent its hand to forming the title of pop singer Madonna's documentary, I Am Because We Are about Malawian orphans.[42] A character in the 2008 animated comedy The Goode Family is named Ubuntu. Ubuntu was the title and theme of an EP released by British band Clockwork Radio in 2012. Ubuntu was the title of an EP released by American rapper Sage Francis in 2012.[citation needed] See also[edit] Look up ubuntu in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. African Traditional Religion Bantu peoples Nguni languages Africanization Decolonisation Ethic of reciprocity Golden Rule Harambee (Kenyan/Swahili concept) Humanity (virtue) Negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa Pan-Africanism Ubuntu theology Universalism Social construction Footnotes[edit] ^ a b "Person". Not a true class 14 word for "humanity". References[edit] ^ Tutu, Desmond (2013). "Who we are: Human uniqueness and the African spirit of Ubuntu". Retrieved 3 October 2019. ^ a b "About the Name". Official Ubuntu Documentation. Canonical. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 2 February 2017. ^ a b c d e f Mugumbate, Jacob Rugare; Chereni, Admire (2020-04-23). "Editorial: Now, the theory of Ubuntu has its space in social work". African Journal of Social Work. 10 (1). ISSN 2409-5605. ^ "Hunhu/Ubuntu in the Traditional Thought of Southern Africa". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. ^ "African philosophy: Ubuntu a way of life". Africa and the World. ^ Gyekye, Kwame (2011). "African Ethics". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. ^ Samassékou, Adama (19 July 2017). "Humanitude, or how to quench the thirst for humanity". UNESCO. ^ Interviewed by Tim Modise, copyright by Canonical Ltd.--transcription: "In the old days, when we were young, a traveler through the country would stop at a village, and he didn't have to ask for food or for water; once he stops, the people give him food, entertain him. That is one aspect of ubuntu, but it will have various aspects". ^ Christian B. N. Gade (2012). "What is Ubuntu? Different Interpretations among South Africans of African Descent" (PDF). South African Journal of Philosophy. 31 (3): 484–503. doi:10.1080/02580136.2012.10751789. S2CID 27706776. ^ Eze, M. O. Intellectual History in Contemporary South Africa, pp. 190–191. ^ Lewis Griggs; Lente-Louise Louw (1995). Valuing Diversity: New Tools for a New Reality. McGraw-Hill. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-07-024778-9. ^ Eze, M. O. (2008). "What is African Comunitarianism? Against consensus as a regulative Ideal". South African Journal of Philosophy. 27 (4): 386–399. doi:10.4314/sajpem.v27i4.31526. S2CID 143775323. ^ Audrey Tang. "Open Source Enlightenment 2015 (Part 1)". ^ Mboti, N. (2015). "May the Real Please Stand Up?". Journal of Media Ethics. 30 (2): 125–147. doi:10.1080/23736992.2015.1020380. S2CID 53519937. ^ a b c d e Samkange, S., & T. M. Samkange (1980). Hunhuism or ubuntuism: A Zimbabwe Indigenous Political Philosophy. Salisbury [Harare]: Graham Publishing, ISBN 0-86921-015-7. 106pp. Paperback ^ see also Zulu noun classes on Wiktionary. ^ in the sense of an abstract quality. The sense "mankind" is taken by the class 7 collective noun isintu. ^ Christian B. N. Gade (2011). "The Historical Development of the Written Discourses on Ubuntu" (PDF). South African Journal of Philosophy. 30 (3): 303–329. doi:10.4314/sajpem.v30i3.69578. S2CID 143928483. ^ Mboti, Nyasha (3 April 2015). "May the Real Ubuntu Please Stand Up?". Journal of Media Ethics. 30 (2): 125–147. doi:10.1080/23736992.2015.1020380. ISSN 2373-6992. S2CID 53519937. ^ "Get the Definition of Ubuntu, a Nguni Word with Several Meanings". ThoughtCo. Retrieved 2017-08-28. ^ Tutu, Desmond (1999). No Future Without Forgiveness. Image. ISBN 0-385-49690-7. ^ "Brief Meaning of African Word 'UBUNTU'". Ubuntu Women Institute USA. January 24, 2012. Archbishop Desmond Tutu further explained ^ File:Experience ubuntu.ogg Experience Ubuntu Interview. ^ Jackson, Tim (July 2010). "Tim Jackson's Economic Reality Check". Speech. TED. Retrieved 2010-12-09. ^ Afri-Forum and Another vs. Malema and others, 23 (The Equality Court, Johannesburg 2011). ^ "Obama's Tribute To Nelson Mandela At Memorial Service - Business Insider". Business Insider. 10 December 2013. ^ "Pambazuka - Teaching uMunthu for global peace". pambazuka.org. ^ a b Steve Sharra (2008). "uMunthu, Peace and Education: On Malawi's 44th Independence Anniversary". Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. ^ "Community of Life: Ecological Theology in African Perspective". ^ U.S. Department of State. Ubuntu Diplomacy. ^ a b Hapanyengwi-Chemhuru, Oswell; Makuvaza, Ngoni (1 August 2014). "Hunhu: In Search of an Indigenous Philosophy for the Zimbabwean Education System Practice without thought is blind: thought without practice is empty" (PDF). Journal of Indigenous Social Development. 3 (1). ISSN 2164-9170. ^ Schiele, Jerome (1 June 1997). "An Afrocentric Perspective on Social Welfare Philosophy and Policy". The Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare. 24 (2). ISSN 0191-5096. ^ a b Seehawer, Maren Kristin (4 July 2018). "Decolonising research in a Sub-Saharan African context: exploring Ubuntu as a foundation for research methodology, ethics and agenda". International Journal of Social Research Methodology. 21 (4): 453–466. doi:10.1080/13645579.2018.1432404. ISSN 1364-5579. ^ Mugumbate, Jacob; Mtetwa, Edmoss (January 12, 2019). "Reframing social work research for Africa's consumers of research products: a guiding tool". African Journal of Social Work. 9 (2): 52–58. ^ Muwanga-Zake, J.W.F. (December 2009). "Building bridges across knowledge systems: Ubuntu and participative research paradigms in Bantu communities". Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education. 30 (4): 413–426. doi:10.1080/01596300903237198. ^ a b Metz, Thaddeus; Gaie, Joseph B.R. (September 2010). "The African ethic of Ubuntu/Botho : implications for research on morality". Journal of Moral Education. 39 (3): 273–290. doi:10.1080/03057240.2010.497609. ^ "The Listings", The New York Times, March 25, 2005. ^ Coughlan, Sean (2006-09-28). "All you need is ubuntu". BBC News Magazine. BBC. Retrieved 2006-09-29. ^ Kiszla, Mark (2007-11-07). "New Big 3 dream in green". The Denver Post. Denver Post. Retrieved 2007-11-09. ^ World Resources Institute. "The Success and Failures of Johannesburn: A Story of Many Summits". WRI.org. ^ General Convention 2009, EpiscopalChurch.org. ^ "I Am Because We Are". powerHouse Books. Further reading[edit] Mboti, N. (2014). "May the Real Ubuntu Please Stand Up?" Journal of Media Ethics 30(2), pp.125-147. Battle, Michael (2007). Reconciliation: The ubuntu theology of Desmond Tutu. Pilgrim Press. ISBN 978-0-8298-1158-2 Eze, Michael Onyebuchi (2017). "I am Because You Are: Cosmopolitanism in the Age of Xenophobia", Philosophical Papers, 46:1, 85-109 Eze, Michael Onyebuchi (2010). Intellectual history in contemporary South Africa. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-62299-9. Eze, Michael Onyebuchi (2008). "What is African Comunitarianism? Against consensus as a regulative Ideal", South African Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 27:4, pp. 386–399 Forster, Dion (2006). Self validating consciousness in strong artificial intelligence: An African theological contribution. Pretoria: Doctoral Dissertation, University of South Africa / UNISA, an extensive and detailed discussion of ubuntu in chapters 5–6. Forster, Dion (2006). Identity in relationship: The ethics of ubuntu as an answer to the impasse of individual consciousness (Paper presented at the South African science and religion Forum – Published in the book The impact of knowledge systems on human development in Africa. du Toit, CW (ed.), Pretoria, Research institute for Religion and Theology (University of South Africa) 2007:245–289).Pretoria: UNISA. Dion Forster Gade, C. B. N. (2017). A Discourse on African Philosophy: A New Perspective on Ubuntu and Transitional Justice in South Africa. New York: Lexington Books. Gade, C. B. N. (2011). "The historical development of the written discourses on ubuntu", South African Journal of Philosophy, 30(3), 303–329 [1]. Kamwangamalu, Nkonko M. (2014). Ubuntu in South Africa: A sociolinguistic perspective to a pan-African concept. In Molefi Kete Asante, Yoshitaka Miike, & Jing Yin (eds), The global intercultural communication reader (2nd ed., pp. 226–236). New York, NY: Routledge. Louw, Dirk J. 1998. "Ubuntu: An African Assessment of the Religious Other". Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy. Metz, Thaddeus 2007, "Toward an African Moral Theory" (Symposium) S. Afr. J. Philos. 2007, 26(4) Ramose, Mogobe B. (2003). "The philosophy of ubuntu and ubuntu as a philosophy". In P. H. Coetzee & A. P. J. Roux (eds), The African philosophy reader (2nd ed., pp. 230–238). New York/London: Routledge. Samkange, S., & T. M. Samkange (1980). Hunhuism or ubuntuism: A Zimbabwe Indigenous Political Philosophy. Salisbury [Harare]: Graham Publishing, ISBN 0-86921-015-7. 106pp. Paperback Education. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers, pp. 27-38. https://www.sensepublishers.com/catalogs/bookseries/other-books/decolonizing-global-citizenship-education/ External links[edit] Look up ubuntu in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Listen to this article (3 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 3 August 2006 (2006-08-03), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) "Hunhu/Ubuntu in the Traditional Thought of Southern Africa". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ubuntu Party Ubuntu Planet Magolego, Melo. 2013. "Ubuntu in Western Society", M&G Thought Leader Blog Sonal Panse, Ubuntu – African Philosophy (buzzle.com) Sean Coughlan, "All you need is ubuntu", BBC News Magazine, Thursday, 28 September 2006. A. Onomen Asikele, Ubuntu Republics of Africa (2011) v t e Politics of South Africa By province Eastern Cape Free State Gauteng KwaZulu-Natal Limpopo Mpumalanga North West Northern Cape Western Cape Political movements Ideologies African nationalism Afrikaner nationalism Anarchism Anti-war Black consciousness Environmentalism Federalism Feminism Liberalism Libertarianism Pan-Africanism Trotskyism Political parties see South Africa political parties Other political organisations AfriForum Afrikanerbond AWB CONTRALESA COSAS Earthlife Africa Khanya College Koeberg Alert LGEP PAGAD SALSA SASCO South African Wine Initiative VAB ZACF Trade unions and Social movements see South Africa trade unions Equal Education Mandela Park Backyarders PASSOP Poor People's Alliance Abahlali baseMjondolo LPM Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign SJC TAC UPM Law see South African law Political culture African Renaissance Alternative media Azania Corruption (Don't) touch me on my studio Freedom Charter Proudly South African Rainbow nation Renaming Tenderpreneurs Toyi-toyi Ubuntu UnFreedom Day Xenophobia Slogans "Amandla Ngawethu!" "No Land! No House! No Vote!" "Dubul' ibhunu" (Shoot the Boer) "One Settler, One Bullet" "Each One, Teach One" Books and periodicals African Communist Amandla ANC Today Biko I Write What I Like Long Walk to Freedom Molotov Cocktail No Land! No House! No Vote! Other Blikkiesdorp Corrective rape Crime Elections Farm attacks #FeesMustFall Gupta family HIV/AIDS Labour brokering Land occupations Legacies of apartheid Lindela Marikana massacre Nkandlagate Political assassinations Political repression Protests Sexual violence Shack fires Terrorism Third Force Category v t e Political history of South Africa Defunct polities Kingdom of Mapungubwe (c. 1075–c. 1220) Dutch Cape Colony (1652–1806) Mthethwa Paramountcy (c. 1780–1817) Ndwandwe Kingdom (c. 1780–1819) Cape Colony (1795–1910) Zulu Kingdom (1816–1897) Natalia Republic (1839–1843) Natal Colony (1843–1910) Orange Free State (1854–1902) South African Republic (1856–1902) Griqualand East (1861–1879) Griqualand West (1870–1873) Goshen (1882–1883) Stellaland (1882–1885) Nieuwe Republiek (1884–1888) Upingtonia (1885–1887) Klein Vrystaat (1886–1891) Orange River Colony (1902–1910) Transvaal Colony (1902–1910) Union of South Africa (1910–1961) Transkei (1976–1994) Bophuthatswana (1977–1994) Venda (1979–1994) Ciskei (1981–1994) Events Before 1652 Battle of Salt River 1652–1815 Dutch settlement French Huguenot settlement Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars Xhosa Wars Battle of Muizenberg Battle of Blaauwberg Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 1815–1910 Mfecane 1820 Settlers Great Trek Boer Republics Transvaal Civil War Mineral Revolution Witwatersrand Gold Rush South African Wars South Africa Act 1909 (National Convention) 1910–1948 South West Africa campaign Maritz rebellion Rand Rebellion Great Depression 1946 African Mine Workers' Union strike Bantustans Apartheid 1948 general election Apartheid legislation Pass laws Internal resistance Coloured-vote constitutional crisis Defiance Campaign Congress of the People Freedom Charter Women's March 1956 1957 Alexandra bus boycott Sharpeville massacre 1960 republic referendum International isolation UN Resolution 1761 UNSC Resolution 591 Academic boycott Disinvestment Constructive engagement Tar Baby Option Sporting boycott Olympics Rugby union Rivonia Trial Durban Moment Border War Israeli alliance Israel–South Africa Agreement Soweto Uprising Weapons of mass destruction Project Coast Church Street bombing 1983 constitutional reform referendum Langa massacre Rubicon speech Dakar Conference Third Force CODESA 1992 apartheid referendum Saint James Church massacre Bophuthatswana crisis Shell House massacre Post- apartheid 1994 general election Government of National Unity Reconstruction and Development Programme Truth and Reconciliation Commission Arms Deal Floor crossing Soweto bombings African Renaissance Xenophobia Marikana massacre 2012 Western Cape farm workers' strike Nkandlagate Racism 2014 platinum strike #RhodesMustFall protests #FeesMustFall student protests Tshwane riots 2019 service delivery protests 2019 Johannesburg riots Political culture African nationalism Afrikaner Calvinism Afrikaner nationalism Azania Baasskap Boerehaat Black Consciousness Movement Day of the Vow Greater South Africa Honorary whites Rooi gevaar Slavery Swart gevaar Uitlander Volkstaat Defunct organisations Civic and political organisations Afrikaner Bond Afrikaner Broederbond Afrikaner Party AITUP APO AVF BPC Black Sash Boerestaat Party CDA CTEG COD Congress Alliance COSG CP DLF Dominion Party DP (1973–1977) DP (1989–2000) DPP DSM ECC FA FD Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners GNP Het Volk HNP (Herenigde) HNP (Herstigte) IDASA ID IP ISL Jeugkrag Johannesburg Reform Committee Labour Party (1910–1958) Labour Party (1969–1994) Liberal Party (1953–1968) NA NCP Natal Indian Congress NLP NNP NP NPP NRP NUSAS Occupy Orangia Unie Oranjewerkers Orde Boerevolk PAVN PFP Progressive Party (Cape Colony) Progressive Party PRP Radio Freedom Reform Party SABP SADECO SAIC SASO SAYCO SAYRCO South African Party (Cape Colony) South African Party (1911–1934) South African Party (1977–1980) TNIP Torch Commando UFP United Party Unionist Party Volksparty Workers Party WOSA Trade unions and social movements APF BCM BLATU CNETU CTSWU FCWU FNETU FOSATU ICU IWW MUSA NEUM NURHS PAWE SAAPAWU SACTU SAIF SARHU SATUC Die Spoorbund UDF Umkosi Wezintaba Paramilitary and terrorist organisations APLA ARM AWB BBB Boeremag Greyshirts MK Ossewabrandwag Orde van die Dood PAGAD SANF Histories of political parties African National Congress Democratic Alliance Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ubuntu_philosophy&oldid=1006332610" Categories: Humanism Social ethics Ethical schools and movements Decolonisation African philosophy Pan-Africanism African and Black nationalism Politics of South Africa Politics of Zimbabwe Bantu Political terminology in South Africa Hidden categories: Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing expert attention from January 2021 All articles needing expert attention Linguistics articles needing expert attention Articles needing cleanup from February 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2021 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2021 Articles needing cleanup from January 2021 Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from January 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from January 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Articles containing video clips Pages with login required references or sources Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Sesotho සිංහල Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 12 February 2021, at 09:03 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
