Indus River - Wikipedia Indus River From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Indus river) This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 6 February 2021. Jump to navigation Jump to search "Indus Valley" redirects here. For the Bronze Age civilisation, see Indus Valley Civilisation. For the constellation, see Indus (constellation). River in Asia "Indus" and "Sindhu" redirect here. For other uses, see Indus (disambiguation) and Sindhu (disambiguation). Indus Sindhu, Mehran[1] The Indus Gorge is formed as the Indus river bends around the Nanga Parbat massif, shown towering behind, defining the western anchor of the Himalayan mountain range. The course and major tributaries of the Indus river Location Country China, India, Pakistan State Ladakh, Punjab, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Sindh, Gilgit-Baltistan, Tibet Cities Leh, Skardu, Dasu, Besham, Thakot, Swabi, Dera Ismail Khan, Sukkur, Hyderabad Physical characteristics Source Sênggê Zangbo  • location Tibetan Plateau 2nd source Gar Tsangpo Source confluence    • location Shiquanhe, Ngari Prefecture, Tibet and India  • coordinates 32°29′54″N 79°41′28″E﻿ / ﻿32.49833°N 79.69111°E﻿ / 32.49833; 79.69111  • elevation 4,255 m (13,960 ft) Mouth Arabian Sea (primary), Rann of Kutch (secondary)  • location Indus River Delta (primary), Kori Creek (secondary), Pakistan, India  • coordinates 23°59′40″N 67°25′51″E﻿ / ﻿23.99444°N 67.43083°E﻿ / 23.99444; 67.43083Coordinates: 23°59′40″N 67°25′51″E﻿ / ﻿23.99444°N 67.43083°E﻿ / 23.99444; 67.43083  • elevation 0 m (0 ft) Length 3,180 km (1,980 mi) as Mapped. 3,249 km (2,019 mi) actual as mentioned in History Books. Basin size 1,165,000 km2 (450,000 sq mi) Discharge    • location Arabian Sea  • average 6,930 m3/s (245,000 cu ft/s)  • minimum 1,200 m3/s (42,000 cu ft/s)  • maximum 58,000 m3/s (2,000,000 cu ft/s) Discharge    • location Tarbela Dam Outflow  • minimum 2,469 m3/s (87,200 cu ft/s) Basin features Tributaries    • left Zanskar River, Suru River, Soan River, Jhelum River, Chenab River, Ravi River, Beas River, Sutlej River, Panjnad River, Ghaggar-Hakra River, Luni River  • right Shyok River, Hunza River, Gilgit River, Swat River, Kunar River, Kabul River, Kurram River, Gomal River, Zhob River The Indus (/ˈindəs/ IND-əs) is a transboundary river of Asia and a trans-Himalayan river of South Asia. The 3,180 km (1,980 mi) river rises in Western Tibet, flows northwest through the Ladakh and Gilgit-Baltistan regions of Kashmir, bends sharply to the left after the Nanga Parbat massif, and flows south-by-southwest through Pakistan, before it empties into the Arabian Sea near the port city of Karachi.[1][2] The river has a total drainage area exceeding 1,165,000 km2 (450,000 sq mi). Its estimated annual flow is around 243 km3 (58 cu mi), twice that of the Nile and three times that of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers combined, making it one of the largest rivers in the world in terms of average annual flow.[3] Its left-bank tributary in Ladakh is the Zanskar River, and its left-bank tributary in the plains is the Panjnad River which itself has five major tributaries, namely the Chenab, Jhelum, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej rivers. Its principal right-bank tributaries are the Shyok, Gilgit, Kabul, Kurram and Gomal rivers. Beginning in a mountain spring and fed with glaciers and rivers in the Himalayan, Karakoram and Hindu Kush ranges, the river supports the ecosystems of temperate forests, plains and arid countryside. The northern part of the Indus Valley, with its tributaries, forms the Punjab region of South Asia, while the lower course of the river ends in a large delta in the southern Sindh province of Pakistan. The river has historically been important to many cultures of the region. The 3rd millennium BC saw the rise of a major urban civilization of the Bronze Age. During the 2nd millennium BC, the Punjab region was mentioned in the Rigveda hymns as Sapta Sindhu and in the Avesta religious texts as Hapta Hindu (both terms meaning "seven rivers"). Early historical kingdoms that arose in the Indus Valley include Gandhāra, and the Ror dynasty of Sauvīra. The Indus River came into the knowledge of the West early in the classical period, when King Darius of Persia sent his Greek subject Scylax of Caryanda to explore the river, c. 515 BC. Contents 1 Etymology and names 2 Description 3 History 4 Geography 4.1 Tributaries 5 Geology 6 Wildlife 6.1 Mammals 6.2 Fish 7 Economy 8 People 9 Modern issues 9.1 Indus delta 9.2 Effects of climate change on the river 9.3 Pollution 9.4 2010 floods 9.5 2011 floods 10 Barrages, bridges, levees and dams 10.1 Gallery 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 13.1 Sources 14 External links Etymology and names[edit] This river was known to the ancient Indians in Sanskrit as Sindhu and the Persians as Hindu which was regarded by both of them as "the border river".[4][5][6][7][8] The variation between the two names is explained by the Old Iranian sound change *s > h, which occurred between 850 and 600 BCE according to Asko Parpola.[9][10] From the Persian Achaemenid Empire, the name passed to the Greeks as Indós (Ἰνδός).[11] It was adopted by the Romans as Indus.[citation needed] Southworth suggests that the name Sindhu is derived from Cintu, a Dravidian word for date palm, a tree commonly found in Sindh.[12][13] The meaning of Sindhu as a "large body of water, sea, or ocean" is a later meaning in Classical Sanskrit.[14] A later Persian name for the river was Darya,[15] which similarly has the connotations of large body of water and sea.[citation needed] Other variants of the name Sindhu include Assyrian Sinda (as early as the 7th century BC), Persian Ab-e-sind, Pashto Abasind, Arab Al-Sind, Chinese Sintow, and Javanese Santri.[citation needed] In other languages of the region, the river is known as دریائے سندھ (Darya-ī Sindh) in Urdu सिन्धु (Sindhu) in Hindi, سنڌو (Sindhu) in Sindhi, سندھ (Sindh) in Shahmukhi Punjabi, ਸਿੰਧ ਨਦੀ (Sindh Nadī) in Gurmukhī Punjabi, اباسين (Abāsin lit. "Father of Rivers") in Pashto, نهر السند (Nahar al-Sind) in Arabic, སེང་གེ་གཙང་པོ། (singi khamban lit. "Lion River" or Lion Spring) in Tibetan, 印度 (Yìndù) in Chinese, Nilab in Turki and සින්දු නදී (Sindhu Nadi) in Sinhalese. Description[edit] The Indus River provides key water resources for Pakistan's economy – especially the breadbasket of Punjab province, which accounts for most of the nation's agricultural production, and Sindh. The word Punjab means "land of five rivers" and the five rivers are Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas and Sutlej, all of which finally flow into the Indus. The Indus also supports many heavy industries and provides the main supply of potable water in Pakistan. The ultimate source of the Indus is in Tibet; the river begins at the confluence of the Sengge Zangbo and Gar Tsangpo rivers that drain the Nganglong Kangri and Gangdise Shan (Gang Rinpoche, Mt. Kailash) mountain ranges. The Indus then flows northwest through Ladakh, India, and Baltistan into Gilgit, just south of the Karakoram range. The Shyok, Shigar and Gilgit rivers carry glacial waters into the main river. It gradually bends to the south and descends into the Punjab plains at Kalabagh, Pakistan. The Indus passes gigantic gorges 4,500–5,200 metres (15,000–17,000 feet) deep near the Nanga Parbat massif. It flows swiftly across Hazara and is dammed at the Tarbela Reservoir. The Kabul River joins it near Attock. The remainder of its route to the sea is in the plains of the Punjab[16] and Sindh, where the flow of the river becomes slow and highly braided. It is joined by the Panjnad at Mithankot. Beyond this confluence, the river, at one time, was named the Satnad River (sat = "seven", nadī = "river"), as the river now carried the waters of the Kabul River, the Indus River and the five Punjab rivers. Passing by Jamshoro, it ends in a large delta to the South of Thatta in the Sindh province of Pakistan The Indus is one of the few rivers in the world to exhibit a tidal bore. The Indus system is largely fed by the snows and glaciers of the Himalayas, Karakoram and the Hindu Kush ranges of Tibet, the Indian states and union territories of Ladakh and Himachal Pradesh and the Gilgit-Baltistan region of Pakistan. The flow of the river is also determined by the seasons – it diminishes greatly in the winter, while flooding its banks in the monsoon months from July to September. There is also evidence of a steady shift in the course of the river since prehistoric times – it deviated westwards from flowing into the Rann of Kutch and adjoining Banni grasslands after the 1816 earthquake.[17][18] Presently, Indus water flows in to the Rann of Kutch during its floods breaching flood banks.[19] The traditional source of the river is the Sênggê Kanbab (a.k.a. Sênggê Zangbo, Senge Khabab) or "Lion's Mouth", a perennial spring, not far from the sacred Mount Kailash marked by a long low line of Tibetan chortens. There are several other tributaries nearby, which may possibly form a longer stream than Sênggê Kanbab, but unlike the Sênggê Kanbab, are all dependent on snowmelt. The Zanskar River, which flows into the Indus in Ladakh, has a greater volume of water than the Indus itself before that point.[20] History[edit] Extent and major sites of the Indus Valley Civilisation 3000 BC Main articles: Indus Valley Civilization and History of Sindh The major cities of the Indus Valley Civilisation, such as Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, date back to around 3300 BC, and represent some of the largest human habitations of the ancient world. The Indus Valley Civilisation extended from across northeast Afghanistan to Pakistan and northwest India,[21] with an upward reach from east of Jhelum River to Ropar on the upper Sutlej. The coastal settlements extended from Sutkagan Dor at the Pakistan, Iran border to Kutch in modern Gujarat, India. There is an Indus site on the Amu Darya at Shortughai in northern Afghanistan, and the Indus site Alamgirpur at the Hindon River is located only 28 km (17 mi) from Delhi. To date, over 1,052 cities and settlements have been found, mainly in the general region of the Ghaggar-Hakra River and its tributaries. Among the settlements were the major urban centres of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, as well as Lothal, Dholavira, Ganeriwala, and Rakhigarhi. Only 40 Indus Valley sites have been discovered on the Indus and its tributaries.[22] The Sutlej, now a tributary of the Indus, in Harappan times flowed into the Ghaggar-Hakra River, in the watershed of which were more Harappan sites than along the Indus. Most scholars believe that settlements of Gandhara grave culture of the early Indo-Aryans flourished in Gandhara from 1700 BC to 600 BC, when Mohenjo-daro and Harappa had already been abandoned. The Rigveda describes several rivers, including one named "Sindhu". The Rigvedic "Sindhu" is thought to be the present-day Indus river. It is attested 176 times in its text, 94 times in the plural, and most often used in the generic sense of "river". In the Rigveda, notably in the later hymns, the meaning of the word is narrowed to refer to the Indus river in particular, e.g. in the list of rivers mentioned in the hymn of Nadistuti sukta. The Rigvedic hymns apply a feminine gender to all the rivers mentioned therein, except for the Brahmaputra. The word "India" is derived from the Indus River. In ancient times, "India" initially referred to those regions immediately along the east bank of the Indus, but by 300 BC, Greek writers including Herodotus and Megasthenes were applying the term to the entire subcontinent that extends much farther eastward.[23][24] The lower basin of the Indus forms a natural boundary between the Iranian Plateau and the Indian subcontinent; this region embraces all or parts of the Pakistani provinces Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh and the countries Afghanistan and India. The first West Eurasian empire to annex the Indus Valley was the Persian Empire, during the reign of Darius the Great. During his reign, the Greek explorer Scylax of Caryanda was commissioned to explore the course of the Indus. It was crossed by the invading armies of Alexander, but after his Macedonians conquered the west bank—joining it to the Hellenic world, they elected to retreat along the southern course of the river, ending Alexander's Asian campaign. Alexander's admiral Nearchus set out from the Indus Delta to explore the Persian Gulf, until reaching the Tigris River. The Indus Valley were later dominated by the Mauryan and Kushan Empires, Indo-Greek Kingdoms, Indo-Scythians and Hepthalites. Over several centuries Muslim armies of Muhammad bin Qasim, Mahmud of Ghazni, Mohammed Ghori, Tamerlane and Babur crossed the river to invade Sindh and Punjab, providing a gateway to the Indian subcontinent. Geography[edit] The Indus River near Leh, India Tributaries[edit] Beas River Chenab River Gar River Gilgit River Gomal River Hunza River Jhelum River Kabul River Kunar River Kurram River Panjnad River Ravi River Shyok River Soan River Suru River Satluj River Swat River Zanskar River Zhob River Geology[edit] Indus River near Leh, India Confluence of Indus and Zanskar rivers. The Indus is at the left of the picture, flowing left-to-right; the Zanskar, carrying more water, comes in from the top of the picture. The Indus river feeds the Indus submarine fan, which is the second largest sediment body on the Earth.[25] It consists of around 5 million cubic kilometres of material eroded from the mountains. Studies of the sediment in the modern river indicate that the Karakoram Mountains in northern Pakistan and India are the single most important source of material, with the Himalayas providing the next largest contribution, mostly via the large rivers of the Punjab (Jhelum, Ravi, Chenab, Beas and Sutlej). Analysis of sediments from the Arabian Sea has demonstrated that prior to five million years ago the Indus was not connected to these Punjab rivers which instead flowed east into the Ganga and were captured after that time.[26] Earlier work showed that sand and silt from western Tibet was reaching the Arabian Sea by 45 million years ago, implying the existence of an ancient Indus River by that time.[27] The delta of this proto-Indus river has subsequently been found in the Katawaz Basin, on the Afghan-Pakistan border. In the Nanga Parbat region, the massive amounts of erosion due to the Indus river following the capture and rerouting through that area is thought to bring middle and lower crustal rocks to the surface.[28] In November 2011, satellite images showed that the Indus river had re-entered India, feeding Great Rann of Kutch, Little Rann of Kutch and a lake near Ahmedabad known as Nal Sarovar.[19] Heavy rains had left the river basin along with the Lake Manchar, Lake Hemal and Kalri Lake (all in modern-day Pakistan) inundated. This happened two centuries after the Indus river shifted its course westwards following the 1819 Rann of Kutch earthquake. The Induan Age at start of the Triassic Period of geological time is named for the Indus region. Wildlife[edit] Fishermen on the Indus River, c. 1905 Accounts of the Indus valley from the times of Alexander's campaign indicate a healthy forest cover in the region, which has now considerably receded. The Mughal Emperor Babur writes of encountering rhinoceroses along its bank in his memoirs (the Baburnama). Extensive deforestation and human interference in the ecology of the Shivalik Hills has led to a marked deterioration in vegetation and growing conditions. The Indus valley regions are arid with poor vegetation. Agriculture is sustained largely due to irrigation works. The Indus river and its watershed has a rich biodiversity. It is home to around 25 amphibian species.[29] Mammals[edit] The Indus river dolphin (Platanista indicus minor) is found only in the Indus River. It is subspecies of the South Asian river dolphin. The Indus river dolphin formerly also occurred in the tributaries of the Indus river. According to the World Wildlife Fund it is one of the most threatened cetaceans with only about 1,000 still existing.[30] There are two otter species in the Indus River basin: the Eurasian otter in the northeastern highland sections and the smooth-coated otter elsewhere in the river basin. The smooth-coated otters in the Indus River represent a subspecies found nowhere else, the Sindh otter (Lutrogale perspicillata sindica).[31] Fish[edit] The Indus River basin has a high diversity, being the home of more than 180 freshwater fish species,[32] including 22 which are found nowhere else.[29] Fish also played a major role in earlier cultures of the region, including the ancient Indus Valley Civilisation where depictions of fish were frequent. The Indus script has a commonly used fish sign, which in its various forms may simply have meant "fish", or referred to stars or gods.[33] In the uppermost, highest part of the Indus River basin there are relatively few genera and species: Diptychus, Ptychobarbus, Schizopyge, Schizopygopsis and Schizothorax snowtrout, Triplophysa loaches, and the catfish Glyptosternon reticulatum.[32] Going downstream these are soon joined by the golden mahseer Tor putitora (alternatively T. macrolepis, although it often is regarded as a synonym of T. putitora) and Schistura loaches. Downriver from around Thakot, Tarbela, the Kabul–Indus river confluence, Attock Khurd and Peshawar the diversity rises strongly, including many cyprinids (Amblypharyngodon, Aspidoparia, Barilius, Chela, Cirrhinus, Crossocheilus, Cyprinion, Danio, Devario, Esomus, Garra, Labeo, Naziritor, Osteobrama, Pethia, Puntius, Rasbora, Salmophasia, Securicula and Systomus), true loaches (Botia and Lepidocephalus), stone loaches (Acanthocobitis and Nemacheilus), ailiid catfish (Clupisoma), bagridae catfish (Batasio, Mystus, Rita and Sperata), airsac catfish (Heteropneustes), schilbid catfish (Eutropiichthys), silurid catfish (Ompok and Wallago), sisorid catfish (Bagarius, Gagata, Glyptothorax and Sisor), gouramis (Trichogaster), nandid leaffish (Nandus), snakeheads (Channa), spiny eel (Macrognathus and Mastacembelus), knifefish (Notopterus), glassfish (Chanda and Parambassis), clupeids (Gudusia), needlefish (Xenentodon) and gobies (Glossogobius), as well as a few introduced species.[32] As the altitude further declines the Indus basin becomes overall quite slow-flowing as it passes through the Punjab Plain. Major carp become common, and chameleonfish (Badis), mullet (Sicamugil) and swamp eel (Monopterus) appear.[32] In some upland lakes and tributaries of the Punjab region snowtrout and mahseer are still common, but once the Indus basin reaches its lower plain the former group is entirely absent and the latter are rare.[32] Many of the species of the middle sections of the Indus basin are also present in the lower. Notable examples of genera that are present in the lower plain but generally not elsewhere in the Indus River basin are the Aphanius pupfish, Aplocheilus killifish, palla fish (Tenualosa ilisha), catla (Labeo catla), rohu (Labeo rohita) and Cirrhinus mrigala.[32] The lowermost part of the river and its delta are home to freshwater fish, but also a number of brackish and marine species.[32] This includes including pomfret and prawns. The large delta has been recognized by conservationists as an important ecological region. Here, the river turns into many marshes, streams and creeks and meets the sea at shallow levels. Palla fish (Tenualosa ilisha) of the river is a delicacy for people living along the river. The population of fish in the river is moderately high, with Sukkur, Thatta, and Kotri being the major fishing centres – all in the lower Sindh course. As a result, damming and irrigation has made fish farming an important economic activity. Economy[edit] The Indus is the most important supplier of water resources to the Punjab and Sindh plains – it forms the backbone of agriculture and food production in Pakistan. The river is especially critical since rainfall is meagre in the lower Indus valley. Irrigation canals were first built by the people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, and later by the engineers of the Kushan Empire and the Mughal Empire. Modern irrigation was introduced by the British East India Company in 1850 – the construction of modern canals accompanied with the restoration of old canals. The British supervised the construction of one of the most complex irrigation networks in the world. The Guddu Barrage is 1,350 m (4,430 ft) long – irrigating Sukkur, Jacobabad, Larkana and Kalat. The Sukkur Barrage serves over 20,000 km2 (7,700 sq mi). After Pakistan came into existence, a water control treaty signed between India and Pakistan in 1960 guaranteed that Pakistan would receive water from the Indus River and its two tributaries the Jhelum River & the Chenab River independently of upstream control by India.[34] The Indus Basin Project consisted primarily of the construction of two main dams, the Mangla Dam built on the Jhelum River and the Tarbela Dam constructed on the Indus River, together with their subsidiary dams.[35] The Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority undertook the construction of the Chashma-Jhelum link canal – linking the waters of the Indus and Jhelum rivers – extending water supplies to the regions of Bahawalpur and Multan. Pakistan constructed the Tarbela Dam near Rawalpindi – standing 2,743 metres (9,000 ft) long and 143 metres (470 ft) high, with an 80-kilometre (50 mi) long reservoir. It supports the Chashma Barrage near Dera Ismail Khan for irrigation use and flood control and the Taunsa Barrage near Dera Ghazi Khan which also produces 100,000 kilowatts of electricity. The Kotri Barrage near Hyderabad is 915 metres (3,000 ft) long and provides additional water supplies for Karachi. The extensive linking of tributaries with the Indus has helped spread water resources to the valley of Peshawar, in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The extensive irrigation and dam projects provide the basis for Pakistan's large production of crops such as cotton, sugarcane and wheat. The dams also generate electricity for heavy industries and urban centers. People[edit] The Indus River near Skardu, in Gilgit–Baltistan. Indus river is sacred to Hindus.[36][37] Sindhu Darshan Festival is held on every Guru Purnima on the banks of Indus.[38] The ethnicities of the Indus Valley (Pakistan and Northwest India) have a greater amount of ANI (or West Eurasian) admixture than other South Asians, including inputs from Western Steppe Herders, with evidence of more sustained and multi-layered migrations from the west.[39] Modern issues[edit] Indus delta[edit] Main article: Indus River Delta Originally, the delta used to receive almost all of the water from the Indus river, which has an annual flow of approximately 180 billion cubic metres (240 billion cubic yards), and is accompanied by 400 million tonnes (390 million long tons) of silt.[40] Since the 1940s, dams, barrages and irrigation works have been constructed on the river Indus. The Indus Basin Irrigation System is the "largest contiguous irrigation system developed over the past 140 years" anywhere in the world.[41] This has reduced the flow of water and by 2018, the average annual flow of water below the Kotri barrage was 33 billion cubic metres (43 billion cubic yards),[42] and annual amount of silt discharged was estimated at 100 million tonnes (98 million long tons).[citation needed] As a result, the 2010 Pakistan floods were considered "good news" for the ecosystem and population of the river delta as they brought much needed fresh water.[43][44] Any further utilization of the river basin water is not economically feasible.[45][46] Vegetation and wildlife of the Indus delta are threatened by the reduced inflow of fresh water, along with extensive deforestation, industrial pollution and global warming. Damming has also isolated the delta population of Indus river dolphins from those further upstream.[47] Large-scale diversion of the river's water for irrigation has raised far-reaching issues. Sediment clogging from poor maintenance of canals has affected agricultural production and vegetation on numerous occasions. Irrigation itself is increasing soil salinization, reducing crop yields and in some cases rendering farmland useless for cultivation.[48] Effects of climate change on the river[edit] The Tibetan Plateau contains the world's third-largest store of ice. Qin Dahe, the former head of the China Meteorological Administration, said the recent fast pace of melting and warmer temperatures will be good for agriculture and tourism in the short term, but issued a strong warning: "Temperatures are rising four times faster than elsewhere in China, and the Tibetan glaciers are retreating at a higher speed than in any other part of the world... In the short term, this will cause lakes to expand and bring floods and mudflows.. In the long run, the glaciers are vital lifelines of the Indus River. Once they vanish, water supplies in Pakistan will be in peril."[49] "There is insufficient data to say what will happen to the Indus," says David Grey, the World Bank's senior water advisor in South Asia. "But we all have very nasty fears that the flows of the Indus could be severely, severely affected by glacier melt as a consequence of climate change," and reduced by perhaps as much as 50 percent. "Now what does that mean to a population that lives in a desert [where], without the river, there would be no life? I don't know the answer to that question," he says. "But we need to be concerned about that. Deeply, deeply concerned." U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke said, shortly before his death in 2010, that he believed that falling water levels in the Indus River "could very well precipitate World War III."[50] Pollution[edit] Over the years factories on the banks of the Indus River have increased levels of water pollution in the river and the atmosphere around it. High levels of pollutants in the river have led to the deaths of endangered Indus river dolphin. The Sindh Environmental Protection Agency has ordered polluting factories around the river to shut down under the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act, 1997.[51] Death of the Indus river dolphin has also been attributed to fishermen using poison to kill fish and scooping them up.[52][53] As a result, the government banned fishing from Guddu Barrage to Sukkur.[54] The Indus is second among a group of ten rivers responsible for about 90% of all the plastic that reaches the oceans. The Yangtze is the only river contributing more plastic.[55][56] 2010 floods[edit] Affected areas as of 26 August 2010 Main article: 2010 Pakistan floods Frequently, Indus river is prone to moderate to severe flooding.[57] In July 2010, following abnormally heavy monsoon rains, the Indus River rose above its banks and started flooding. The rain continued for the next two months, devastating large areas of Pakistan. In Sindh, the Indus burst its banks near Sukkur on 8 August, submerging the village of Mor Khan Jatoi.[58] In early August, the heaviest flooding moved southward along the Indus River from severely affected northern regions toward western Punjab, where at least 1,400,000 acres (570,000 ha) of cropland was destroyed, and the southern province of Sindh.[59] As of September 2010[update], over two thousand people had died and over a million homes had been destroyed since the flooding began.[60][61] 2011 floods[edit] Main article: 2011 Sindh floods The 2011 Sindh floods began during the Pakistani monsoon season in mid-August 2011, resulting from heavy monsoon rains in Sindh, eastern Balochistan, and southern Punjab.[62] The floods caused considerable damage; an estimated 434 civilians were killed, with 5.3 million people and 1,524,773 homes affected.[63] Sindh is a fertile region and often called the "breadbasket" of the country; the damage and toll of the floods on the local agrarian economy was said to be extensive. At least 1.7 million acres (690,000 ha; 2,700 sq mi) of arable land were inundated. The flooding followed the previous year's floods, which devastated a large part of the country.[63] Unprecedented torrential monsoon rains caused severe flooding in 16 districts of Sindh.[64] Barrages, bridges, levees and dams[edit] In Pakistan currently there are six barrages on the Indus: Guddu Barrage, Sukkur Barrage, Kotri Barrage (also called Ghulam Muhammad barrage), Taunsa Barrage, Chashma Barrage and Jinnah Barrage. Another new barrage called "Sindh Barrage" is planned as a terminal barrage on the Indus River.[65][66] There are some bridges on river Indus, such as, Dadu Moro Bridge, Larkana Khairpur Indus River Bridge, Thatta-Sujawal bridge, Jhirk-Mula Katiar bridge and recently planned Kandhkot-Ghotki bridge.[67] The entire left bank of Indus river in Sind province is protected from river flooding by constructing around 600 km long levees. The right bank side is also leveed from Guddu barrage to Lake Manchar.[68] In response to the levees construction, the river has been aggrading rapidly over the last 20 years leading to breaches upstream of barrages and inundation of large areas.[69] Tarbela Dam in Pakistan is constructed on the Indus River, while the controversial Kalabagh dam is also being constructed on Indus river. Pakistan is also building Munda Dam. Gallery[edit] Play media Video of River Indus at Kotri Barrage, Sindh, Pakistan. Frozen Indus, Near Nyoma Indus at Skardu Indus near Dera Ismail Khan See also[edit] Chura Sharif Ghaggar-Hakra River Geology of the Himalaya HMS Indus Indus Valley Civilisation Rivers of Jammu and Kashmir Sarasvati River Sind Sagar Doab Sindhology Sindhu Darshan Festival Sindhu Pushkaram Rigvedic rivers Notes[edit] References[edit] ^ a b Ahmad, Nafis; Lodrick, Deryck (6 February 2019), Indus River, Encyclopedia Britannica, retrieved 5 February 2021 ^ DK; Smithsonian (2017), Natural Wonders of the World, Penguin/DK Publishing, pp. 240–, ISBN 978-1-4654-9492-4 ^ "Indus water flow data in to reservoirs of Pakistan". Retrieved 15 August 2017. ^ Witzel, Michael (1995). "Early Indian history: Linguistic and textual parameters". In Erdosy, George (ed.). The Indo-Aryans of Ancient South Asia: Language, Material Culture and Ethnicity. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 85–125. ISBN 978-3-11-014447-5. ^ Thieme, P. (1970). "Sanskrit sindu-/Sindhu- and Old Iranian hindu-/Hindu-". In Mary Boyce; Ilya Gershevitch (eds.). W. B. Henning memorial volume. Lund Humphries. p. 450. ISBN 9780853312550.: "As the great frontier river that represents the natural dividing line between India and Iran, the Indus could most easily and fittingly be called Sindhu- 'Frontier' by the Indians and Hindu- 'Frontier' by the Iranians." ^ Osada, Toshiki (2006). Indus Civilization: Text & Context. Manohar Publishers & Distributors. p. 100. ISBN 978-81-7304-682-7.: 'P. Theme (1991) understood the Indus as the "border river" dividing IA and Iran. tribes and has derived it from IE with an etymology from the root "si(n)dh" to divide."' ^ Boyce, Mary (1989). A History of Zoroastrianism: The Early Period. BRILL. pp. 136–. ISBN 978-90-04-08847-4.: "The word hindu- (Skt. sindhu-), used thus to mean a river-frontier of the inhabited world, was also applied generally, it seems, to any big river which, like the Indus, formed a natural frontier between peoples or lands." ^ Bailey, H. W. (1975). "Indian Sindhu-, Iranian Hindu- (Notes and Communications)". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 38 (3): 610–611. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00048138. JSTOR 613711.: "The word sindhu- is used of a 'mass of water' (samudra-), not therefore primarily 'flowing' water. Hence the second derivation of 'enclosed banks' is clearly preferable." ^ Parpola 2015, Chapter 9. sfn error: no target: CITEREFParpola2015 (help) ^ Prasad, R.U.S. (25 May 2017). River and Goddess Worship in India: Changing Perceptions and Manifestations of Sarasvati. Taylor & Francis. pp. 23–. ISBN 978-1-351-80655-8. ^ Mukherjee, Bratindra Nath (2001). Nationhood and Statehood in India: A historical survey. Regency Publications. p. 3. ISBN 978-81-87498-26-1.: "Apparently the same territory was referred to as Hi(n)du(sh) in the Naqsh‐i‐Rustam inscription of Darius I as one of the countries in his empire.[10] The terms Hindu and India ('Indoi) indicate an original indigenous expression like Sindhu. The name Sindhu could have been pronounced by the Persians as Hindu (replacing s by h and dh by d) and the Greeks would have transformed the latter as Indo‐ (Indoi, Latin Indica, India) with h dropped..." ^ Southworth, Franklin. The Reconstruction of Prehistoric South Asian Language Contact (1990) p. 228 ^ Burrow, T. Dravidian Etymology Dictionary p. 227 ^ Mountjoy, Shane (2004). The Indus River. Infobase Publishing. pp. 8–. ISBN 978-1-4381-2003-4. ^ Possehl, Gregory L. (1999). Indus age: the beginnings. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 9780812234176. ^ Holdich, Thomas Hungerford (1911). "Indus" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 507–508. ^ 70% of cattle-breeders desert Banni; by Narandas Thacker, TNN, 14 February 2002; The Times of India ^ "564 Charul Bharwada & Vinay Mahajan, Lost and forgotten: grasslands and pastoralists of Gujarat". ^ a b "Indus re-enters India after two centuries, feeds Little Rann, Nal Sarovar". Retrieved 22 December 2017. ^ Albinia (2008), p. 307. ^ Williams, Brian (2016). Daily Life in the Indus Valley Civilization. Raintree. p. 6. ISBN 978-1406298574. ^ Malik, Dr Malti (1943). History of India. New Saraswati House India Pvt Ltd. p. 12. ISBN 978-81-7335-498-4. ^ Henry Yule: India, Indies Archived 28 June 2012 at Archive.today. In Hobson-Jobson: A glossary of colloquial Anglo-Indian words and phrases, and of kindred terms, etymological, historical, geographical and discursive. New ed. edited by William Crooke, B.A. London: J. Murray, 1903 ^ "Was the Ramayana actually set in and around today's Afghanistan?". ^ Clift; Gaedicke; Edwards; Lee; Hildebrand; Amjad; White; and Schlüter (2002). "The stratigraphic evolution of the Indus Fan and the history of sedimentation in the Arabian Sea". Marine Geophysical Researches. 23 (3): 223–245. Bibcode:2002MarGR..23..223C. doi:10.1023/A:1023627123093. S2CID 129735252.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ Clift, Peter D.; Blusztajn, Jerzy (15 December 2005). "Reorganization of the western Himalayan river system after five million years ago". Nature. 438 (7070): 1001–1003. Bibcode:2005Natur.438.1001C. doi:10.1038/nature04379. PMID 16355221. S2CID 4427250. ^ Clift, Peter D.; Shimizu, N.; Layne, G.D.; Blusztajn, J.S.; Gaedicke, C.; Schlüter, H.-U.; Clark, M.K.; Amjad, S. (August 2001). "Development of the Indus Fan and its significance for the erosional history of the Western Himalaya and Karakoram". GSA Bulletin. 113 (8): 1039–1051. Bibcode:2001GSAB..113.1039C. doi:10.1130/0016-7606(2001)113<1039:DOTIFA>2.0.CO;2. ^ Zeitler, Peter K.; Koons, Peter O.; Bishop, Michael P.; Chamberlain, C. Page; Craw, David; Edwards, Michael A.; Hamidullah, Syed; Jam, Qasim M.; Kahn, M. Asif; Khattak, M. Umar Khan; Kidd, William S. F.; Mackie, Randall L.; Meltzer, Anne S.; Park, Stephen K.; Pecher, Arnaud; Poage, Michael A.; Sarker, Golam; Schneider, David A.; Seeber, Leonardo; Shroder, John F. (October 2001). "Crustal reworking at Nanga Parbat, Pakistan: Metamorphic consequences of thermal-mechanical coupling facilitated by erosion". Tectonics. 20 (5): 712–728. Bibcode:2001Tecto..20..712Z. doi:10.1029/2000TC001243. ^ a b "Indus River" (PDF). World' top 10 rivers at risk. WWF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2012. ^ "WWF – Indus River Dolphin". Wwf.panda.org. Retrieved 22 September 2012. ^ Khan, W.A.; Bhagat, H.B. (2010). "Otter Conservation in Pakistan". IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 27 (2): 89–92. ^ a b c d e f g Mirza, M.R.; Mirza, Z.S. (2014). "Longitudinal Zonation in the Fish Fauna of the Indus River in Pakistan". Biologia (Pakistan). 60 (1): 149–152. ^ Sparavigna, A. (2008). Icons and signs from the ancient Harappa. Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Torino. ^ "Tarabela Dam". structurae.the cat in the hat. Retrieved 9 July 2007. ^ "Indus Basin Project". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 9 July 2007. ^ Kapoor, Subodh (2002). The Indian Encyclopaedia: Hinayana-India (Central India). Cosmo Publications. ISBN 978-81-7755-267-6. ^ Basu, Baman Das (2007). The Sacred books of the Hindus. Cosmo Publications. ISBN 978-81-307-0533-0. ^ "Corona effect: Only Sindhis allowed for Sindhu Darshan Fest". Retrieved 24 October 2020. ^ Pathak, Ajai K.; Kadian, Anurag; Kushniarevich, Alena; Montinaro, Francesco; Mondal, Mayukh; Ongaro, Linda; Singh, Manvendra; Kumar, Pramod; Rai, Niraj; Parik, Jüri; Metspalu, Ene (6 December 2018). "The Genetic Ancestry of Modern Indus Valley Populations from Northwest India". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 103 (6): 918–929. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.022. ISSN 0002-9297. PMC 6288199. PMID 30526867. ^ "Indus Delta, Pakistan: economic costs of reduction in freshwater flow" (PDF). International Union for Conservation of Nature. May 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2018. ^ Sarfraz Khan Quresh (March 2005). "Water, Growth and Poverty in Pakistan" (PDF). World Bank. ^ "Pakistan's water economy: getting the balance right". July 2018. ^ Walsh, Declan (21 October 2010). "Pakistan floods: The Indus delta". The Guardian. ^ Walsh, Declan (5 October 2010). "Pakistan's floodwaters welcomed along Indus delta". The Guardian. ^ Keller, Jack; Keller, Andrew; Davids, Grant (January 1998). "River basin development phases and implications of closure". Retrieved 25 September 2020. ^ "Integrated Water Resource Systems: Theory and Policy Implications" (PDF). Retrieved 22 June 2018. ^ "Indus River Delta". World Wildlife Fund. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. ^ "Technology Breakthroughs for Global Water Security: A Deep Dive into South Asia". 12 September 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2018. ^ "Global warming benefits to Tibet: Chinese official. Reported 18 August 2009". 17 August 2009. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 4 December 2012. ^ Farrow, Ronan (2018). War on Peace: The End of Diplomacy and the Decline of American Influence. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0393652109. ^ "SEPA orders polluting factory to stop production". Dawn. 3 December 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2012. ^ "Fishing poison killing Indus dolphins, PA told". Dawn. 8 March 2012. Retrieved 27 April 2016. ^ "18 dolphins died from poisoning in Jan". Dawn. 1 May 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. ^ "Threat to dolphin: Govt bans fishing between Guddu and Sukkur". The Express Tribune. 9 March 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. ^ "Almost all plastic in the ocean comes from just 10 rivers - 30.11.2017". DW.COM. Retrieved 22 August 2018. about 90 percent of all the plastic that reaches the world's oceans gets flushed through just 10 rivers: The Yangtze, the Indus, Yellow River, Hai River, the Nile, the Ganges, Pearl River, Amur River, the Niger, and the Mekong (in that order). ^ Schmidt, Christian; Krauth, Tobias; Wagner, Stephan (11 October 2017). "Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea" (PDF). Environmental Science & Technology. American Chemical Society (ACS). 51 (21): 12246–12253. Bibcode:2017EnST...5112246S. doi:10.1021/acs.est.7b02368. ISSN 0013-936X. PMID 29019247. ^ "Indus Basin Floods" (PDF). Asian Development Bank. 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2018. ^ Bodeen, Christopher (8 August 2010). "Asia flooding plunges millions into misery". Associated Press. Retrieved 8 August 2010. ^ Guerin, Orla (7 August 2010). "Pakistan issues flooding 'red alert' for Sindh province". British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 7 August 2010. ^ "BBC News – Pakistan floods: World Bank to lend $900m for recovery". bbc.co.uk. 17 August 2010. Retrieved 24 August 2010. ^ "BBC News – Millions of Pakistan children at risk of flood diseases". bbc.co.uk. 16 August 2010. Retrieved 24 August 2010. ^ "Pakistan floods: Oxfam launches emergency aid response". BBC World News South Asia. 14 September 2011. Retrieved 15 September 2011. ^ a b "Floods worsen, 270 killed: officials". The Express Tribune. 13 September 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2011. ^ Government of Pakistan Pakmet.com.pk Retrieved on 19 September 2011 Archived 24 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "PM okays Indus river barrage to mitigate water woes". Retrieved 8 August 2019. ^ "Center announces Rs125bn Sindh barrage project". Retrieved 24 August 2019. ^ "Government to launch Kandhkot-Ghotki bridge over River Indus next month: Sindh CM". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 1 August 2016. ^ "Restore Pakistan's rivers, handle floods, droughts and climate change". Retrieved 29 July 2019. ^ "Pakistan: Getting More from Water (see Page 50)" (PDF). World Bank. Retrieved 29 March 2019. Sources[edit] G.P. Malalasekera (1 September 2003). Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Volume 1. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 978-81-2061-823-7. Albinia, Alice. (2008) Empires of the Indus: The Story of a River. First American Edition (20101) W. W. Norton & Company, New York. ISBN 978-0-393-33860-7. World Atlas, Millennium Edition, p. 265. Jean Fairley, "The Lion River", Karachi, 1978. External links[edit] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Indus River (category) The origins of Indus: Gar river basin, Sengge river basin Blankonthemap The Northern Kashmir Website Bibliography on Water Resources and International Law Peace Palace Library Northern Areas Development Gateway The Mountain Areas Conservancy Project Indus River watershed map (World Resources Institute) Indus Treaty Baglihar Dam issue Indus Indus Wildlife at the Wayback Machine (archived 7 October 2006) First raft and kayak descents of the Indus headwaters in Tibet Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting's project on water issues in South Asia Links to related articles v t e Hydrography of Pakistan Lakes Attabad Ansoo Baghsar Banjosa Borith Chitta Katha Dudipatsar Hadero Haleji Hanna Karambar Keenjhar Khabikki Kundol Lower Kachura Lulusar Mahodand Manchar Namal Payee Pyala Rama Rawal Rush Saiful Muluk Satpara Sheosar Shonter Siri Subri Uchhali Upper Kachura Rivers Indus Astore Bara Basol Braldu Bunhar Chenab Dasht Dori Gambila Ghaggar-Hakra Gilgit Gomal Haro Hingol Hispar Hunza Jhelum Jindi Kabul Kech Korang Kunar Mula Neelum Panjkora Panjnad Poonch Rakshan Ravi Rupal Shaksgam Shigar Shingo Shyok Soan Suru Sutlej Swan Swat Tawi Zhob Coastal Indian Ocean Arabian Sea Gulf of Oman Categories Lakes Rivers v t e Hydrography of the Indian subcontinent Inland rivers Beas Betwa Bhagirathi Brahmaputra Chambal Chenab Damodar Godavari Gandaki Ganges Ghaghara Indus Jhelum Kali Kaveri Kosi Krishna Luni Mahanadi Mahaweli Meghna Narmada Padma Ravi Sarasvati Sankosh Sharda Son Sutlej Tapti Yamuna Inland lakes, deltas, etc. Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Indus Delta Dal Lake Pookode Lake Skeleton Lake Chilika Lake Lake Powai Borith Lake Saiful Muluk Gosaikunda Nizam Sagar Red Hills Lake Malampuzha Kerala backwaters Pulicat Lake Coastal Indian Ocean Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Mannar Laccadive Sea Palk Bay Palk Strait Categories Lakes of Bangladesh / India / Nepal / Pakistan / Sri Lanka Reservoirs and dams in India / Sri Lanka Rivers of Bangladesh / Bhutan / India / Nepal / Pakistan / Sri Lanka v t e Rivers of India Seven Great Rivers of India Indus . Ganges · Yamuna · Brahmaputra · Krishna · Godavari · Kaveri Indus River Basin Indus River Panjnad River (Pakistan) Sutlej River Beas River Parbati River (Himachal Pradesh) Chenab River Ravi River Jhelum River Neelum River or Kishanganga Suru River Dras River Shingo River Yapola River Zanskar River Markha River Khurna River Tsarap River Doda River Hanley River Marutsudha River Ganges River Basin Ganga River Hooghly River Damodar River Barakar River Jahanavi River Jalangi River River Churni Ichamati River Rupnarayan River Ajay River Mayurakshi River Dwarakeswar River Mundeswari River Meghna River Padma River Punarbhaba River Atrai River Mahananda River Kosi River Bagmati River Bhurhi Gandak River Phalgu Gandaki River Son River North Koel River Amanat River Rihand River Gopad River Goini River Neur River Banas River Johilla River Ghaghara River West Rapti River Rohni River Sarda River Ladhiya River Sarayu River Gori Ganga River Darma River Gomati River Sarayan River Kathna River Yamuna River Ban Ganga River Ken River Betwa River Dhasan River Halali River Kaliasote River Sindh River Kwari River Hindon River Karban River Pahuj River Chambal River Kuno River Banas River Berach River Bandi River Mashi River Morel River Kotari River Shipra River Ahar River Kali Sindh River Parbati River (Madhya Pradesh) Gambhir River Parbati River (Rajasthan) Ramganga River Khoh River Mandal River Alaknanda River Mandakini River Pindar River Nandakini River Dhauliganga River Rishiganga River Bhagirathi River Bhilangna River Jahnavi River Godavari River Basin Purna River Pranahita River Wainganga River Kanhan River Kolar River Pench River Kulbehra River Nag River Wardha River Penganga River Pedda Vagu River Indravati River Bandiya River Sabari River Pravara River Manjira River Manair River Other minor tributaries: Taliperu River Kinnerasani River Darna River Sindphana River Krishna River Basin Krishna River Koyna Venna River Varna River Panch ganga Vedganga river Tillari Bhima Agrani Yerala Varada River Tungabhadra River Tunga River Bhadra River Vedavathi River Suvarnamukhi River Veda River Avathi River Bhima River Sina River Nira River Mula-Mutha River Mula River Mutha River Chandani River Kamini River Moshi River Ambi River Bori River Man River Bhogwati River Indrayani River Kundali River Kumandala River Ghod River Bhama River Pavna River Malaprabha River Ghataprabha River Varma River Venna River Urmodi River Koyna River Pennar River Basin Pennar River Kaveri River Basin Kaveri River (Cauvery) Kollidam (distributary) Amaravati River Arkavathy River Bhavani River Sarabanga River Noyyal River Hemavati River Kabini River Lakshmana Tirtha River Tapi River Basin Tapi River Tapi River Gomai River Arunavati River Panzara River Kaan River Aner River Girna River Titur River Waghur River Purna River Nalganga River Vaan River Morna River Katepurna River Umaa River Sangiya River Mahi River Basin Mahi River Som River Gomati Riverty5h65 Sabarmati River Basin Sabarmati River Wakal River Sei River Harnav River Meghna River Basin Meghna River (in the Bangladesh) Padma River (main Ganges Dhaleshwari River Dakatia River Gumti River Feni River (Old) Brahmaputra River (in Bangladesh) Titas River Surma River Kangsha River, Someshwari River Kushiyara River Manu River Barak River Tuivai River Irang River Costal rivers Subarnarekha River Kharkai River Kangsabati River Bhagirathi Hughli Thenad River Mahananda River, North Bengal Draupadi River Baitarani Bhargavi Brahmani Daya Devi Hasdeo Ib Jonk Kathajodi Koina Kuakhai Kushabhadra Mand North Karo Ong Pairi Sankh Shivnath Sondur Surubalijora South Karo South Koel Tel River Thamirabarani River Palar River Vaigai River Vaippar River Vellar River Vasishta Nadi Swetha River Cooum River Adyar River Ponnaiyar River Kaveri River Noyyal River Vaaniyaar River Kali River Netravati River Sharavathi River Aghanashini River Gangavalli River Periyar River Bharathapuzha River Pamba River Chaliyar River Chandragiri River Karyangod River Shastri River Gad River Vashishti River Savitri River Kundalika River Gandhari River Patalganga River Ulhas River Thane Creek Vasai Creek Mithi River or Mahim River Oshiwara River Dahisar River Tansa River in Thane Vaitarna River Surya River Chenna River Terna river Other major rivers Ghaggar River Musi River Samir River, India/ india Luni River Bhavani River v t e Indus Valley Civilisation History and culture Indus River Periodisation Bhirrana Culture Mehrgarh Culture Kulli Culture Amri Culture Bara Culture Cemetery H Culture Indus-Mesopotamia relations Architecture Harappan architecture Sanitation of the Indus Valley Civilisation Great Bath, Mohenjo-daro Inventions of the Indus Valley Civilisation Language and script Harappan language Indus script Indus Valley sites in Pakistan Harappa Mohenjo-daro Nausharo Chanhudaro Mehrgarh Lakhueen-jo-daro Larkana Pirak Kot Diji Rehman Dheri Amri Sutkagan Dor Sokhta Koh Tharro Hills Pir Shah Jurio Allahdino Balakot Ongar Ganeriwala Nindowari Judeir-jo-daro Dabarkot Indus Valley sites in India Dholavira Gola Dhoro Lothal Bhagatrav Rangpur Jognakhera Surkotada Kalibangan Manda Alamgirpur Daimabad Malwan Kunal Rakhigarhi Rupnagar Rupar Hulas Kanmer Oriyo timbo Dher Majra Lohari Ragho Dwarka Kuntasi Loteshwar Mandi Farmana Ganeshwar Sothi Siswal Sanauli Sanghol Pabumath Nagwada Babar Kot Balu Bara Bargaon Bhagwanpura Bhirrana Banawali Rojdi Kotla Nihang Khan Kerala-no-dhoro Mitathal Desalpur Indus Valley sites in Afghanistan Mundigak Shortugai Related topics Meluhha Ochre Coloured Pottery culture Northern Black Polished Ware Painted Grey Ware culture v t e Rigveda Mandalas 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Deities Devas Agni Indra Soma Ushas Visvedevas Maruts Ashvins Tvastar Rbhus Pushan Rudra Mitra Varuna Aryaman Apam Napat Asuras Vritra Susna Dasas Danu Danavas Rivers Sapta Sindhu Nadistuti Sarasvati Sindhu Sarayu Rasā Yavyavati Drishadvati Rishis Saptarishi Gritsamada Vishvamitra Vamadeva Atri Angiras Bharadvaja Vasishta Dirghatamas v t e Punjab geography Beas River Bari Doab Chenab River Chhachh Cholistan Desert Doaba Ganji Bar Ghaggar river Indus River Jhelum River Jech Doab Kachhi Kala Chitta Range Kirana Bar Kirana Hills Majha Malwa Margalla Hills Neeli Bar Puadh Pothohar Plateau Rechna Doab Ravi River Salt Range Sandal Bar Sind Sagar Doab Sivalik Hills Soon Valley Sulaiman Mountains Sutlej River Thal Desert v t e Hydrography of Jammu and Kashmir Rivers Chenab Doda Dras Indus Jhelum Poonch Lidder Markha Nala Palkhu Neelum Ravi Rambi Ara Saltoro Shingo Shyok Sind Suru Tawi Tsarap Veshaw Yapola Zanskar Lakes Dal Lake Nigeen Lake Anchar Lake Gadsar Lake Gangabal Lake Krishansar Lake Manasbal Lake Mansar Lake Pangong Tso Sheshnag Lake Tulian Lake Vishansar Lake Wular Lake Kausar Nag Satsar Nundkol Brari Nambal Khushal Sar Gil Sar Khanpursar Glaciers Drang-drung Glacier Kolahoi Glacier Machoi Glacier Shafat Glacier Siachen Glacier Dams, Barrages Baglihar Dam Chutak Dam Dul Hasti Dam Dumkhar Dam Kishanganga Dam Nimoo Bazgo Dam Ratle Dam Salal Dam Uri Dam Hydrography of surrounding areas Himachal Pradesh Punjab, India Pakistan v t e Geography of South Asia Mountains Himalayas Mount Everest Western Ghats Eastern Ghats Aravalli Range Nilgiris Vindhya Range Satpura Range Garo Hills Shivalik Hills Himachal Range Khasi Hills Anaimalai Hills Cardamom Hills Sulaiman Mountains Toba Kakar Range Karakoram Hindu Kush Chittagong Hill Tracts Naga Hills Gandhamardan Hills Lushai Hills Plateaus Deccan Plateau Chota Nagpur Ladakh Plateau Mysore Plateau Malwa Deserts Thar Desert Lowlands Indo-Gangetic plain Doab Indus Valley Indus River Delta Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Terai Coromandel Coast Konkan Sundarbans Rann of Kutch Protected areas in Tamil Nadu Makran Islands Andaman and Nicobar Islands Lakshadweep Atolls of the Maldives By country India Pakistan Nepal Bhutan Sri Lanka Bangladesh Maldives Afghanistan v t e Rivers of India Seven Great Rivers of India Indus . Ganges · Yamuna · Brahmaputra · Krishna · Godavari · Kaveri Indus River Basin Indus River Panjnad River (Pakistan) Sutlej River Beas River Parbati River (Himachal Pradesh) Chenab River Ravi River Jhelum River Neelum River or Kishanganga Suru River Dras River Shingo River Yapola River Zanskar River Markha River Khurna River Tsarap River Doda River Hanley River Marutsudha River Ganges River Basin Ganga River Hooghly River Damodar River Barakar River Jahanavi River Jalangi River River Churni Ichamati River Rupnarayan River Ajay River Mayurakshi River Dwarakeswar River Mundeswari River Meghna River Padma River Punarbhaba River Atrai River Mahananda River Kosi River Bagmati River Bhurhi Gandak River Phalgu Gandaki River Son River North Koel River Amanat River Rihand River Gopad River Goini River Neur River Banas River Johilla River Ghaghara River West Rapti River Rohni River Sarda River Ladhiya River Sarayu River Gori Ganga River Darma River Gomati River Sarayan River Kathna River Yamuna River Ban Ganga River Ken River Betwa River Dhasan River Halali River Kaliasote River Sindh River Kwari River Hindon River Karban River Pahuj River Chambal River Kuno River Banas River Berach River Bandi River Mashi River Morel River Kotari River Shipra River Ahar River Kali Sindh River Parbati River (Madhya Pradesh) Gambhir River Parbati River (Rajasthan) Ramganga River Khoh River Mandal River Alaknanda River Mandakini River Pindar River Nandakini River Dhauliganga River Rishiganga River Bhagirathi River Bhilangna River Jahnavi River Godavari River Basin Purna River Pranahita River Wainganga River Kanhan River Kolar River Pench River Kulbehra River Nag River Wardha River Penganga River Pedda Vagu River Indravati River Bandiya River Sabari River Pravara River Manjira River Manair River Other minor tributaries: Taliperu River Kinnerasani River Darna River Sindphana River Krishna River Basin Krishna River Koyna Venna River Varna River Panch ganga Vedganga river Tillari Bhima Agrani Yerala Varada River Tungabhadra River Tunga River Bhadra River Vedavathi River Suvarnamukhi River Veda River Avathi River Bhima River Sina River Nira River Mula-Mutha River Mula River Mutha River Chandani River Kamini River Moshi River Ambi River Bori River Man River Bhogwati River Indrayani River Kundali River Kumandala River Ghod River Bhama River Pavna River Malaprabha River Ghataprabha River Varma River Venna River Urmodi River Koyna River Pennar River Basin Pennar River Kaveri River Basin Kaveri River (Cauvery) Kollidam (distributary) Amaravati River Arkavathy River Bhavani River Sarabanga River Noyyal River Hemavati River Kabini River Lakshmana Tirtha River Tapi River Basin Tapi River Tapi River Gomai River Arunavati River Panzara River Kaan River Aner River Girna River Titur River Waghur River Purna River Nalganga River Vaan River Morna River Katepurna River Umaa River Sangiya River Mahi River Basin Mahi River Som River Gomati Riverty5h65 Sabarmati River Basin Sabarmati River Wakal River Sei River Harnav River Meghna River Basin Meghna River (in the Bangladesh) Padma River (main Ganges Dhaleshwari River Dakatia River Gumti River Feni River (Old) Brahmaputra River (in Bangladesh) Titas River Surma River Kangsha River, Someshwari River Kushiyara River Manu River Barak River Tuivai River Irang River Costal rivers Subarnarekha River Kharkai River Kangsabati River Bhagirathi Hughli Thenad River Mahananda River, North Bengal Draupadi River Baitarani Bhargavi Brahmani Daya Devi Hasdeo Ib Jonk Kathajodi Koina Kuakhai Kushabhadra Mand North Karo Ong Pairi Sankh Shivnath Sondur Surubalijora South Karo South Koel Tel River Thamirabarani River Palar River Vaigai River Vaippar River Vellar River Vasishta Nadi Swetha River Cooum River Adyar River Ponnaiyar River Kaveri River Noyyal River Vaaniyaar River Kali River Netravati River Sharavathi River Aghanashini River Gangavalli River Periyar River Bharathapuzha River Pamba River Chaliyar River Chandragiri River Karyangod River Shastri River Gad River Vashishti River Savitri River Kundalika River Gandhari River Patalganga River Ulhas River Thane Creek Vasai Creek Mithi River or Mahim River Oshiwara River Dahisar River Tansa River in Thane Vaitarna River Surya River Chenna River Terna river Other major rivers Ghaggar River Musi River Samir River, India/ india Luni River Bhavani River v t e Major rivers of China Seven Great Rivers of Eastern China Yangtze · Yellow · Pearl · Heilongjiang · Huai · Hai · Liao Yangtze system Yalong Min Dadu Qingyi (Sichuan) Tuo Jialing Bailong Fu (Sichuan) Qu Wu Hanshui Muma Chi Du Bao Qing Chishui Xiang Xiao Lei Mi Zi Yuan Lishui Miluo Gan Fu (Jiangxi) Xin Qingyi (Anhui) Qinhuai Xitiao Huangpu Suzhou Creek Yellow system Daxia Tao Huangshui Datong Qingshui Wuding Fen Wei Jing Luo (Shaanxi) Luo (Henan) Qin Dawen Xiaoqing Pearl system North East West Yujiang Yong Xun Qian Hongshui Nanpan Beipan Rong Li (Guangxi) Gui Liu Heilongjiang system Songhua 2nd Songhua Nen Mudan Ussuri Argun Kherlen Woken Huifa Huai system Guo Ying Shiguan Quan Hui Hong Hai system Chaobai Yongding Hutuo Ziya Daqing Wenyu Juma Sanggan Fuyang Wei Ju Jiyunhe Liao system Hun Taizi Xar Moron Xinkai Western Liao Eastern Liao Other major rivers Tarim Black Karatash Ili Shule Tumen Yalu Luan Red Minjiang Longjiang Lancang Beilun Nujiang Lion Spring Elephant Spring Yarlung Tsangpo Nyang Subansiri Irtysh Suifen Qiantang Puyang Jiao (Shandong) Dai Si Shu Cao'e Jiao (Zhejiang) Ou Mulan Jin (Fujian) Han (Guangdong) Mei Ting Nandu Wanquan Taping Major canals Grand Canal Lingqu North Jiangsu Main Irrigation Canal v t e List of rivers of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Artsakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Book Category Asia portal Authority control GND: 4095957-0 NARA: 10038808 NDL: 00628235 NKC: xx0117801 VIAF: 237269647 WorldCat Identities: viaf-237269647 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indus_River&oldid=1005259476" Categories: Indus River History of Sindh Indus basin Indus Valley Civilisation International rivers of Asia Rigvedic rivers Rivers of China Rivers of Gilgit-Baltistan Rivers of India Rivers of Jammu and Kashmir Rivers of Pakistan Rivers of Sindh Rivers of Tibet Sacred rivers Sarasvati River Rivers in Buddhism Rivers of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rivers of Punjab (Pakistan) Induan Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 maint: uses authors parameter Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Use British English from February 2012 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2010 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia external links cleanup from April 2020 Wikipedia spam cleanup from April 2020 Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ भोजपुरी Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chi-Chewa Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Лезги Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 سرائیکی Edit links This page was last edited on 6 February 2021, at 20:13 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
