State Emblem of India - Wikipedia State Emblem of India From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from National Emblem of India) Jump to navigation Jump to search National emblem of the Republic of India State Emblem of India Armiger Republic of India Adopted 26 January 1950 Motto Satyameva Jayate ("Truth Alone Triumphs") (from the "Mundaka Upanishad", a part of Hindu Vedas) The State Emblem of India is the national emblem of India. The emblem is an adaptation of the Lion Capital of Ashoka, a statue from 250 BCE. The statue depicted four Asiatic lions back to back, with the two-dimensional emblem showing three lions. An emblem based upon the Lion Capital of Ashoka was first adopted as the emblem of the Dominion of India in December 1947.[1] The current version of the emblem was officially adopted on 26 January 1950, the day India became a republic.[2] Contents 1 History 2 Usage and description 3 Emblems of national bodies 4 Emblems of states and union territories 5 Historic seals and emblems 5.1 Pre-colonial India 5.1.1 Emblem of the Mughal Empire in historical progression 5.2 British rule in India 5.3 Portuguese rule in India 5.4 French Rule in India 5.5 Azad Hind 5.6 Dominion of India 6 See also 7 References History[edit] The task of beautifying the original copy of the Constitution of India was given to Nandalal Bose (then the Principal of Kala Bhavan Shanti Niketan in Shanti Niketan) by the Congress.[3][4] Bose set out to complete this task with the help of his students, one of whom was Dinanath Bhargava, then 21 years old.[5] Bose was keen to include the Lion Capital of Ashoka into the opening pages of the constitution. Wanting the lions to be depicted realistically, he chose Bhargava who studied the behaviour of the lions at the Kolkata Zoo.[6] On 26 January 1950, it was adopted as the State Emblem of India.[7] Usage and description[edit] The emblem forms a part of the official letterhead of the Government of India and appears on all Indian currency as well. It also functions as the national emblem of India in many places and appears prominently on Indian passports. The Ashoka Chakra (wheel) on its base features in the centre of the national flag of India. The usage of the emblem is regulated and restricted under State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005 under which, no individual or private organisation is permitted to use the emblem for official correspondence. The actual Sarnath capital features four Asiatic lions standing back to back, symbolising power, courage, confidence, and pride, mounted on a circular base. At the bottom is a horse and a bull, and at its centre is a wheel (Dharma chakra). The abacus is girded with a frieze of sculptures in high relief of The Lion of the North, The Horse of the West, The Bull of the South and The Elephant of the East, separated by intervening wheels, over a lotus in full bloom, exemplifying the fountainhead of life and creative inspiration. Carved from a single block of sandstone, the polished capital is crowned by the Wheel of the Law (Dharma Chakra). In the emblem finally adopted, only three lions are visible, the fourth being hidden from view. The wheel appears in relief in the centre of the abacus, with a bull on the right and a galloping horse on the left, and outlines of Dharma Chakras on the extreme right and left. A horse and a bull are represented right below the abacus. The bull represents hard work and steadfastness, while the horse represents loyalty, speed, and energy. The bell-shaped lotus beneath the abacus has been omitted.[8] Forming an integral part of the emblem is the motto inscribed below the abacus in Devanagari script: Satyameva Jayate (Sanskrit: सत्यमेव जयते; lit. "Truth alone triumphs").[9] This is a quote from Mundaka Upanishad,[10] the concluding part of the sacred Hindu Vedas. Ashoka Stambha at Indian Museum, Calcutta An early photograph of the Sarnath capital A smaller copy of the Sarnath capital at the National Museum, Delhi Emblems of national bodies[edit] Emblem of the Supreme Court of India Emblem of the Central Bureau of Investigation Emblems of states and union territories[edit] Main article: List of Indian state emblems Most of the states and union territories of India have their own state emblem, seal or coat of arms which are used as an official governmental symbol, while six states and five union territories use the National Emblem of India with a text legend as their official governmental seal. Some of the autonomous district councils established by the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India have also adopted an official emblem. Historic seals and emblems[edit] Pre-colonial India[edit] Emblem of the Mughal Empire in historical progression[edit] Main article: Emblem of the Mughal Empire Emblem of the Mughal Empire Emblem of the Mughal Empire during the reign of Aurangzeb. Last known emblem of the Mughal emperor during the reign of Bahadur Shah Zafar. British rule in India[edit] Coat of arms of the East India Company, used during the Company Raj (1757–1858) Coat of arms of the United Kingdom, used for official documents, publications and correspondence from the Parliament of the United Kingdom during the British Raj (1858–1947) Star of India, an emblem used within India during the British Raj. Portuguese rule in India[edit] Coat of arms of Portuguese India (1600–1935) Lesser coat of arms of Portuguese India (1935–1961) Greater coat of arms of Portuguese India (1935–1951) Greater coat of arms of Portuguese India (1951–1961) French Rule in India[edit] Emblem of French India (1912–1954) Azad Hind[edit] Seal of the Azad Hind (1943–1945) Dominion of India[edit] Coat of arms of the United Kingdom used by the Dominion of India (August–December 1947) Emblem used by the Dominion of India (December 1947–January 1950)[1] Emblem of the Constituent Assembly of India See also[edit] Flag of India Jana Gana Mana Vande Mataram National symbols of India List of Indian state emblems List of Indian state symbols References[edit] ^ a b "Press Communique' - State Emblem" (PDF). Press Information Bureau of India - Archive. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 August 2017. ^ "State Emblem". Know India. Government of India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2016. ^ "Celebrating Nandalal Bose, artist who rejected everything British & designed India's constitution". The Print. ^ Pathak, Yamini (31 March 2016). "Bringing out the kala". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 4 September 2019. ^ "We Know Very Little About The Man Who Designed Our National Emblem. Here Are Some Facts Him". indiatimes.com. 26 December 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2019. ^ "A Tribute to the Artist who Sketched and Illuminated India's National Emblem". The Better India. 26 December 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2019. ^ "A Tribute to the Artist who Sketched and Illuminated India's National Emblem". The BetterIndia. 26 December 2016. Retrieved 15 September 2019. ^ "The State Emblem Of India (Prohibition Of Improper Use) Act, 2005" (PDF). 20 December 2005. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2012. ^ Kamal Dey v. Union of India and State of West Bengal (Calcutta High Court 14 July 2011).Text ^ "Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Standing Committee On Home Affairs: 116th Report on The State Emblem Of India (Prohibition Of Improper Use) Bill, 2004" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2013. v t e  India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBT Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Postal Science and technology Pre-colonial Stone Age Indus Valley Civilization Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Middle kingdoms Hoysala Chola Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Mughals Marathas European trade Colonial Princely East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Zamindari Bengali Renaissance Political reforms Princely states Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II Geography Environment Biosphere reserves Climate Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Desert Extreme points Glaciers Islands Lakes Mountains Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions East North Northeast South West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislatures State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Elections Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX CNX Nifty Government-owned companies List of companies Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Commerce ministers Finance Commission Planning Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate Foreign trade Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India FDI in India Currency Indian rupee History Historical exchange rates data of the Indian rupee Coinage Reserve Bank of India Governors India Government Mint Financial services Banking Banks Insurance Foreign exchange reserves Bombay Stock Exchange National Stock Exchange Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion Black money History Economic Development Economic liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People Billionaires Businesspeople Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Defence Construction Education Energy Nuclear Solar Wind Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Information technology Media Cinema Television Printing Mining Pharmaceuticals Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Airlines Aviation Civil Ports Rail Utilities Electricity Water Society Culture Society Caste system Corruption Demographics Women Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Healthcare Hospitals in India Languages Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Sexuality Crime Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Public holidays Sport v t e Armorial of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Artsakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Book Category Asia portal v t e National symbols of India Constitutional Flag of India (Flag) Ashoka Lion Capital (National Emblem) Satyameva Jayate (Motto) Jana Gana Mana (National Anthem) Vande Mataram (National Song) Flora and Fauna Bengal tiger (Animal) Indian peafowl (Bird) Indian Lotus (Flower) Indian Banyan (Tree) Mango (Fruit) Indian elephant (Heritage animal) South Asian river dolphin (Aquatic animal) King cobra (Reptile) Ganges (River) Days Independence Day Republic Day Gandhi Jayanti Others Indian rupee (Currency) Saka calendar (Calendar) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_Emblem_of_India&oldid=1005870853" Categories: National emblems National symbols of India Indian coats of arms Coats of arms with lions Coats of arms with bulls Coats of arms with horses Coats of arms with the dharmachakra Memorials to Ashok Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Use Indian English from October 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 吴语 Yorùbá 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 9 February 2021, at 21:03 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement
